---
layout: post
title:  "Valuing Conflict"
date:   2018-10-27 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

The more I study the changes in perspective I've been experiencing, the more I realize that they fall in line with a shift in the way I view time. Doing something wrong enough to end up in an argument or fight before seemed like the scariest thing in the world, like an assault on my soul, a stain on my being, a disgrace worth avoiding at all costs. What use did conflict hold if I could please everyone perfectly? Well, it turns out that life is about more than pleasing people, and even if it was, you please more people in the long-run by having the tough conversations that make you both uncomfortable upfront rather than spread out over the course of a relationship. Issues seep into the solid base of a relationship and rot it from the inside out through resentment and a slow, slow rust. I no longer feel that second-hand awkwardness when I witness an argument anymore because I realize now that the only bad thing about it is right now. The anger, hurt and anguish only exist right now. They won't be around for long, but what will stay is everything that was uncovered from its deep tomb, buried in wait for a moment like this to be free. The most dangerous parts of conflict lie in the heat of the moment, in viewing it as a license to hurt and to be hurt forever, to hold a grudge and to burn bridges. In the vast majority of cases, conflict is responsible for strengthening bridges in ways that nothing else can, and it's only the few bridge-burning ones that we remember most vividly that taint our view of all conflict. 

The truth is conflict is amazing. The more often we have it, the better. Everything we've learnt to associate with conflict is not really core to the concept or its execution; we don't have to be angry in conflict, we can curious. We don't have to be offended in conflict, we can be engaged and interested. We can see beyond the next 3 minutes that we imagine this conflict harms us in and envision the next 30 years for which this conflict works to enable us. Conflict is always going to happen, but we get to choose how it helps us and those around us. Conflict is just explosive, weaponized openness, so theoretically if we made radical openness completely normal, perhaps conflicts wouldn't even happen. If your perspective and intent is always made clear, and those around you are intentionally doing the same, conflict as we know it begins to look much more like a rapid exchange of meaning and perspective, aligning misaligned ones and strengthening aligned ones on a regular basis. It becomes a routine part of maintaining and building relationships rather than the nuclear option reserved for the strongest of emotional slights. 

I wonder when we'll begin to think of people as worth feeling hurt over, worth feeling angry with and worth being offended by. I can't imagine a relationship that isn't built on loving the rewarding and the gruelling experiences together. Avoiding conflict is like struggling to lift that brand-new suitcase because you don't want to scratch the surface by dragging it somewhere. No relationship floats on clouds and the sooner we can embrace friction, the smoother the journey becomes. 