---
layout: post
title:  "Creativity"
date:   2018-11-16 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

What exactly is creativity? We perceive it as insightful connections, innovation, an imagination made real, inventiveness and sometimes eccentricity in perspective. I think at the base of it all lies a feeling of safety. Of either having nothing to lose, or everything to gain from taking the leap. There are two ways to feel safe. One is the creative desperation we're used to seeing tied to intense moments of creativity; breakthrough moments when someone has no choice but failure, until they suddenly come to an insight. We know from Gary Klein's theory of a triple path model to insights, creative desperation is just one of three paths. This is also the first way to have nothing to lose, where failure is imminent and risk has no perceived cost. We often view this as a very dangerous, stressful situation, but at the base of creative desperation is a need to succeed and a calmness in knowing there is no other option.

Another way to feel safe is to build an environment where failure isn't about losing everything. Where we don't have to be desperate and have nothing to lose to feel safe. An environment where people feel protected and trusted enough to take risks and look stupid. It's funny to me that failure being imminent and unavoidable vs. failure being anticipated but not imminent can lead to very similar outcomes; people leaping to creative solutions because they feel safe enough to take the risk. Because it's no longer a risk but rather a move, a step forward, no matter how it goes. Creative desperation happens because there isn't any other option but success. A culture of safety and trust enables creativity because failure is viewed as part of the same option as success. They are no longer disparate and that enables people to what they do best; sacrifice for each other and the greater good knowing that they will be supported rather than blamed, helped up rather than stepped on and knowing that they will always belong. 
