---
layout: post
title:  "Experimentation"
date:   2018-11-14 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

True experimentation is hard when you have a specific set of results in mind. Some of the greatest discoveries have been unexpected, but you can't notice breakthroughs if you're looking for incremental, familiar answers. If you have to ask who else is doing it to justify it, it may be worth looking at why you're afraid to experiment. Fear can be very reasonable, but reason isn't always the best way to learn. Most of the time the decisions we make out of fear lead to regret. Sometimes they save our lives but that's rare. The opportunity cost to following fear is real, but not the easiest to measure or pay attention to. What does it take to feel safe enough to experiment with something that you think is going to fail? Menlo Innovations fosters a culture of experimentation and they genuinely hope that at least half of their experiments fail. They know that if more of their experiments are succeeding, then they're only searching for safe ways to experiment and starting to learn less than they could. They wouldn't be pushing their boundaries without this target of failure and we know that the vast majority of growth and learning happens at the edge of our knowledge and skill. It may feel productive to stay in the centre of what you know best but it's one of the riskiest places to get comfortable in. Frankly, it's quite boring too.

Finding people you can build trust with, psychological safety to be yourself, will enable you to experiment like never before. We don't conquer fear by getting rid of it, but rather by building cultures that enable us to face it knowing that failure is just another step forward. These cultures are only as rare or as abundant as we choose to make them.