---
layout: post
title:  "Journey"
date:   2018-06-30 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*It’s well and good to hope for that special mentor or coach (and cherish the ones you come across). But don’t put off learning until they arrive. Those exceptional teachers and mentors are rare. Mostly, our lives are populated by everyone else—people who are doing their best but may not know better , who are too busy to give us the time we need, who are difficult themselves, or who are just plain lousy at giving feedback or coaching. The majority of our learning is going to have to come from folks like these, so if we’re serious about growth and improvement, we have no choice but to get good at learning from just about anyone.*       
>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Douglas Stone & Sheila Heen__, *Thanks For The Feedback*

Self-reflection is great for growth, but it would be silly to expect us to understand ourselves best. We’re simply too close to ourselves to see things objectively, and when we don’t see things as they are, we can’t learn efficiently. Our reality is very different from the reality of others. The closest we can get to true reality is to understand as many perspectives as we can and look for everything they hold in common, no matter how jarring or unpleasant those revelations may be. 

I learnt this early on in my life, but I failed to live it out in my day to day life. In the peace and quiet of my room it’s easy to tell myself to take feedback well and be understanding, but in the heat of a critical moment when I’m under pressure and my ego is screaming at me to defend myself, I fall short of understanding. By the time I realize it, the most valuable learning moments have already passed. I end up feeding on the scraps of knowledge left behind, tattered and torn by nobody but myself. 

Thanks to the people around me, I learnt of this flaw in myself and was recommended resources to learn about and tackle the problem. The more I read about it, the more I realized how common it is and how well understood it is by science. The most insightful and practical resource that was shown to me was *Crucial Conversations*, a book that explores the very depths of why we react the way we do when under pressure, why we find ourselves at our worst when we need to be our very best selves, and realistic ways to address the problem at its source.

As it turns out, a huge part of it for me was just realizing how fallible I truly am, and how amazing that is. That I have everything to gain by being wrong, and almost nothing to gain by being right. Once I internalized that reality, learning and growth flowed so much more effortlessly. I had finally gotten out of my own way and allowed myself to consider other perspectives with the same value I gave my own.  I think this journey is unique for everyone. For me this is what got it started. For you it might be something else entirely. I urge you to find that catalyst for yourself, the spark to start this journey, because I genuinely believe that I couldn’t have made it through life to where I am today if I hadn’t discovered the first steps on this personal journey, no matter where the path may lead. 











