---
layout: post
title:  "Joy"
date:   2018-06-22 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*This journey to joy at work is personal. It has to be. You want a job or an organization that brings you joy. You want to enjoy that “good kind of tired” at the end of each day, knowing you made your life just a little bit better today. 
Along the way, you transform yourself into the person you’ve always dreamed you could be. You get in touch with what makes your heart sing and you draw others to your flame. Those closest to you start to notice a difference in who you’ve become.*       
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Richard Sheridan__, *Joy, Inc.*

Joy, as Rich aptly describes it above, has grown increasingly important to me over the last year. I didn’t realize it for the longest time, but I’ve always been on this journey. In one way or another,we all are. We pursue that joy in different ways, each of us following our own path to the same destination. 

At some point along that journey, I started to lose sight of what mattered. I started to get comfortable. I started to make excuses and justify why I was settling for good enough. I knew how I felt, but I brushed those feelings aside and told myself that I was fortunate, blessed, that I should be grateful for what I have. 

All fair points to make to myself, but they were masking the truth. 

Beneath the surface of my excuses were the fears and doubts keeping me in place. Good truly is the enemy of great and I had deprived my feelings a voice for far too long. 

My real fortune was being surrounded by allies who could feel my despair, even when I was blind to it. Allies who saw that I was struggling and who spent countless precious hours feeding my curiosity and sparking a flame within me to fend off the encroaching darkness. They gave my feelings a voice, and for that I will be eternally grateful. They believed in me when I doubted myself the most and gave me the courage to speak up and be true to myself. Only now do I see the power in what they did for me.

If you ever feel like you’re stumbling on your path in life, please reach out to those around you. Trust that they care for you and are willing to believe in you even when you don’t believe in yourself. And if you ever sense that someone close to you is struggling, trust that feeling and offer them a hand. You never know how much it might mean to them. 

I know I wouldn’t be where I am today if it weren’t for a few individuals taking a small, genuine step to help me, enabling me to take a giant leap of faith on my journey to joy. 

 
 





