---
layout: post
title:  "Conflict"
date:   2018-07-07 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*Apple's Chief Design Officer Jony Ive told a story about a time when he pulled his punches when criticizing his team's work. When Steve Jobs asked Jony why he hadn't been more clear about what was wrong, Jony replied, "Because I care about the team." To which Steve replied, "No, Jony, you're just really vain. You just want people to like you." Recounting the story, Jony said, "I was terribly cross because I knew he was right."* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Kim Scott__, *Radical Candor*

When I first started the job I just recently quit, I thought I didn't deserve to be there. I felt supported and trusted almost immediately, being given responsibility and told, "Use your best judgement." When I made mistakes, I felt like my colleagues stood by me and looked out for my best interests as a human being, not just a coworker. People seemed to get along well with few problems, so I thought we must be doing things right. 

Since I felt like I owed them a better version of myself, I started to read and learn more about being a good human being in the hopes that I could fit in someday. In many ways they were nicer than I thought possible, and I wanted to be the same kind of person. My two jobs before were both ridden with verbal abuse and manipulation, so I felt very lucky to find something different. My colleagues suggested great resources for me to learn from to get better at life, the first of which was *Crucial Conversations*.

In the book I learnt about the concept of psychological safety in an environment, and that when people feel safe to be themselves, they're capable of both giving and receiving very honest feedback. When safety is compromised however, people respond very differently to the situation. They resort to one of two defense mechanisms, either *violence* or *silence*. Violence often presents itself as a raised voice, defensive rants, personal attacks on character and persistent interruptions. Silence often presents itself either as shutting down and going quiet, or forms of masking, such as sarcasm, subtle jabs, or hushed rumours. 

After a few bouts of denial with myself, I came to realize I had left environments that encouraged forms of violence for one that instead encouraged forms of silence. Rather than deject me, this discovery somehow energized me as I dove deeper into the science trying to figure out if that was really our problem, if other companies faced these problems too, and how we might best address it. 

That's when I came face to face with the concept of healthy conflict, an idea I had never considered before. The idea that the unhealthy conflicts I was so often mired in previously were in fact riddled with facets of violence, which had taught me to avoid conflict unless I felt cornered into it; That conflict is an all or nothing fight, a last resort. Unfortunately, these experiences had blinded me to the other side of the coin. That potentially healthy conflicts avoided in the name of keeping the peace could cause just as much damage as abusive conflict, damage that would bubble up as unhealthy forms of silence and resentment as time passed, festering with no room to breathe. 

I had fallen for the fool's choice, feeling like I was trapped between one or the other. As I learnt more about healthy conflict, I came to realize that there's a third choice. That healthy conflict is not applicable to only a few situations, but almost all of them. As I dug deeper into prominent figures in the business world, I found more and more examples of them attacking problems in a way that was open, direct, yet respectful and human.

One of my favourite anecdotes is another Steve Jobs story about when he had a disagreement with an employee at Apple. The employee insisted Steve was wron about something, but Steve argued back vehemently and the employee clammed up and backed off. Later on it was revealed that the employee had been right and Steve. Much to the employee's surprise, Steve stormed into his office and began reaming into him. The employee responded along the lines of, and I'm paraphrasing the dialogue here, "Why are you yelling me? I was right!" 

Steve shot back, "That's exactly why I'm here! You were right and you still backed down. Next time you believe you're right, stand your ground with me or don't come back here."

Steve realized just how difficult it can be for someone to stand up for what they believe in, and he made it very clear that he wouldn't stand for anything but candor. Too many people in Steve's shoes might have let the learning moment pass and simply felt bad about being wrong, instead choosing to slink away into the future hoping to make a better decision next time. Instead, Steve chose healthy conflict and made it clear that he values what's right, not who's right, drawing a very clear line in the sand for everyone he worked with.









