---
layout: post
title:  "A Formative Story"
date:   2018-11-10 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

As I was first learning about this stuff and absorbing some of it nearly a year ago, I had an interesting incident. It struck me at the time as strange, and yet it felt completely natural. I was living with my friend in a townhouse complex and the complex had a community pool. I had been living there for a while and wanted to try it out, so I went one night after work. It was a peaceful experience just floating around for a while, keeping an eye on the clock occassionally to make sure I got out before the closing time. I had turned on only the lights in the swimming room since I figured there was no reason to waste energy. Thirty minutes before I thought I'd have to leave, the community manager came in and asked me what I was doing. She began yelling at me as I got out of the pool and demanded that I change and leave immediately. Oddly enough, despite how angry she was at me, I didn't feel awkward, defensive or agitated. It was a strange feeling at the time, but I just stood there and listened to her accuse me of breaking rules, of not turning on all the lights like I was supposed to and for not reading the signs. I just listened, nodded and felt strangely calm. She asked me which unit I lived in and when she learned I was renting a basement space, she threatened to tell the owners of the unit what I had done. I let her know the unit number and told her that sounds fair. By this point she was barking commands at me while reprimanding me and for some reason it felt so engaging to listen to her. She threatened to have my access revoked if I came back without being accompanied by one of the owner's, and then she asked me if I had anything to say for myself. I simply replied, "Thank you. You're absolutely right, there's no excuse for my actions." She nodded and then continued berating me while I observed it all happen, feeling surprised that I felt no guilt or fear, or even anger or derision towards her. 

After a few minutes she paused and her expression shifted. Almost as if to herself she said, "You're quite a respectful young man." Then she went on to say, "You know what, feel free to come here anytime." I was astonished and tried to clarify, "As long as I'm with the owner, right?" and she smugly waved my words aside, "No, *I'm* telling you to use the pool anytime you like." I thanked her as I left and she had this grin on her face the whole time as she walked me out. At the time I had no idea what had just happened, but it felt good. Now it seems clear to me that it was a moment of genuine human connection, and that we often take for granted that we need to respond to anger in kind. Some of the most meaningful moments of connection are gems hidden within conflicts, but we can't always see them that way. I know I certainly didn't, I just got lucky and chose to listen and be grateful for someone being angry at me for my wrongdoings. Somehow that made all the difference. 