---
layout: post
title:  "But Everyone Does That"
date:   2018-11-13 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

At first people are intrigued when I describe my journey to learn to be as honest with others as I am with myself. Then when I explain that I realized that that's fairly useless if I constantly lie to myself, they're surprised and ask, *Do you lie to yourself a lot?* At this point they might be looking at me like a very interesting foreign species.

 I reply, *Oh, everyday. Here's how.* I then go on to elaborate on the different ways I rationalize and frame my actions and thoughts to think of myself as a good person. A spark enters their eyes as they begin to understand and they interject excitedly, *Oh, but everyone does that!* 

 I nod and point out how they just went from viewing my struggle as so separate from their own and strange, to viewing it as similar but perhaps not a struggle at all if everybody lies to themselves. Then I end up sharing my perspective on their words: *I don't know if everyone does that. Even if they do, that doesn't make it reasonable, helpful, or acceptable. We choose our standards and as much as we want to align them with those around us to belong, I don't think everyone does it because they want to; I think everyone deoes it because everyone is taught that everyone does it. The moment we make it possible to feel like we can belong and also learn to be honest with ourselves, we can truly pursue it, and I feel that possibility now. That's all that's changed for me. I just know I can be safe and different because it's not different at all. We're all human and we all crave the genuine connection that self-honesty enables.*

 Part of the reluctance to understand my choice also seems to stem from the idea that if I want to be honest with myself, that I must hate my currently dishonest self. I don't view it that way at all since I've built habits I'm not even conscious of. In a way they define me, but they don't imprison me unless I let them. Part of the way we let habits and conditioning imprison ourselves is by thinking of them as bad, and extending that badness to ourselves. If we can believe that our essence is good and our habits can change however we like, we feel much freer to pursue change from a place of self-love and fulfillment rather than disassisfaction and wanting. It's part of why I've been questioning the idea that deep passion needs to be fuelled by deep dissatisfaction. I've been learning that it can just as well be fuelled by an all-encompassing love for people and the world as a whole. Working on something doesn't mean it's bad, it just means it can change. Everything can change, and something I'd like to see us build is a global culture that enables us to make choices free of the constraints of *But Everyone Does That*. To feel perfectly safe saying, *I'm going to do something else, not because I think it's better for all of us but because I think it fits me better*. 

 There's often this assumption we make that an individual's moral choices reflect their view of how the entire world should be. I question that because you don't need to want to change the world to want to change yourself. You could perfectly love the perspectives of others while not letting that love fuel a guilt for feeling the way you individually do. There's nothing wrong with being different, but we often feel like we need to justify it and have a good reason to stand out. We really don't, because we stand out whether we like it or not. The choice we get is to continually work to fit in or to get comfortable and construct our home out there. There is no right answer, which is why the ideal environment gives people the psychological freedom to pursue any or all of them.