---
layout: post
title:  "Freedom"
date:   2018-07-06 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*Freedom isn’t the ability to do whatever you want. It’s the willingness to do whatever you want.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Seth Godin__, *The Icarus Deception*, 

We live in an era where we have more freedom than ever before. The average person can call family across the country with the touch of a button, something a billionare couldn't dream of doing a mere century ago. 

And yet we seem just as bound by our social constraints as ever. While authors of the past had to struggle to court a publicist and find an audience, anyone with a phone and an internet connection can share ideas with the world today. This is the closest we've ever gotten to a meritocracy; content judged solely by how well it resonates and connects with its audience with not a single care to its creator's status, birth, race, gender, attractiveness or even past choices. 

We can fail and start over a hundred different ways in mere days without a blink and yet we choose to repeat the same cycles of struggle for years. Is it truly freedom if we squander it on dissatisfying work and shallow pleasantries? Or is it freedom if we take the leap and annoy, anger or disappoint the few to fulfil ourselves, and eventually the many?

The greatest thing about today is it holds much more opportunity than yesterday. Now holds much more inspiration than five minutes later, so use it. Grab ahold of the present and spur it forward in the direction you most desire. Otherwise you might find yourself snapping awake in the distant future on a horse circling home in search of hay, tumbleweeds brushing past you in a ghost town of your own making. 

What's comfortable today is what we've been taught was safe 50 years ago. Study hard, get good grades, go to a good college, get a trying, but safe job, work and be recognized, then retire and enjoy your well deserved life. 

What's comfortable today is not safe today. It's time to get uncomfortable and take risks, because the most dangerous thing in today's world is living like it's 50 years ago. We're past the industrial age and today's age relies on something deeper. If what you're doing right now isn't creating human connection, you need to figure out how to enable that connection. This might have been dangerous to pursue in years past, but not today. Today, more than any other day before, is rife with the danger of leaving your freedom unexercised. Do what you want, and make no excuses about it. Own what you do, and creating will be its own greatest reward.







