---
layout: post
title:  "Insights"
date:   2018-07-17 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*The magic of insights stems from the force for noticing connections, coincidences and curiosities; the force for detecting contradictions; and the force of creativity unleashed by desperation. That magic lives inside us, stirring restlessly.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Gary Klein__, *Seeing What Others Don't* 

I've been fascinated by the relatively young field of positive psychology, started by Martin Seligman, a psychotherapist who decided that his field was so focused on reducing or eliminating misery that it neglected to research and apply ways to add joy and meaning to people's lives. 

Gary Klein felt that this perspective could apply to his field of decision research as well. Traditionally decision research studied human error and looked for ways to reduce mistaken decisions. Gary saw the potential in also looking for ways to help people improve their ability to make insightful decisions. 

He came to the conclusion that to improve performance, we need to reduce error and increase insights. Most often we focus on reducing error because it's the most apparent factor, and seemingly the easiest to affect. Unfortunately, reducing mistakes does nothing to help us gain insights, and when we invest ourselves too heavily into reducing our errors, we're potentially less likely to gain insights. 

I can certainly empathize with the feeling he describes receiving from his audience when he presented this concept, a frustration they felt when their companies stifled their attempts to do an excellent job by instead focusing their resources on reducing mistakes. I believe the rewards for catalyzing insight are far greater than the rewards for suppressing mistakes, and the kind of environment that insights flourish in may be the very same environment that encourages mistakes. 

Mistakes will happen no matter how hard we try to prevent them. What our error-phobic attitudes do manage to prevent however, is the open discussion of and understanding of those very mistakes, allowing them to do the same damage they would usually do while completely eliminating the rewarding insightful value derived from encouraging and learning from them. Too many places have it completely backwards so it's no wonder people feel a deep, intrinsic, often unexplainable frustration with the way problems are addressed and policies designed. 

I'm glad that I'm starting to find the words to explain these feelings I was steeped in over the last year that stemmed from the well-intentioned but poorly justified perspectives of the past. The next step will be figuring out the actions to take to create a new 'normal' for my life, one driven by science and as close to a true understanding as we have of the way we function. 





