---
layout: post
title:  "Meaning"
date:   2018-07-29 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*Ultimately, man should not ask what the meaning of his life is, but rather he must recognize that it is he who is asked.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Victor E. Frankl__ 

I've been struggling with some questions over the last week, primarily about this pursuit on which I find myself. What exactly does it mean to live a meaningful life, to be a good human being, or to make the world a better place? To be honest, I have no idea, but the more questions I ask, the more questions I seem to uncover. All I know for sure is the life I was living was definitely the opposite the above, and perhaps even a life spent seeking answers (or more questions) is more worthwhile than one spent settling for the conventional. 

Some things I've figured out so far are that a meaningful life for me will probably involve other people. Sure, there are yogis in the Himalayas who live in solitude and find their peace that way, and maybe that's where I'll end up, but so far my most fulfilling moments have involved meaningful, genuine connections with other human beings. So step 1, seek that out, whatever it may take to find it, and keeping finding it over and over again, as well as enriching the and growing the connections and trusting relationships I already have. 

**Ideas** are great. They bring people together and create those genuine connections, and maybe part of my purpose is to seek out ideas that connect people with each other and to share them with the world. Learning and teaching are both lots of fun, and for me it's been impossible to deeply experience one without passionately participating in the other. 

**Insights** are engaging and thrilling to discover, so I've been working to cultivate a mindset that can be open to new information while being skeptical of factors often taken for granted. This will likely be a lifelong pursuit too, but I can already feel it paying off in the way I approach problems as allies rather than adversaries.

**Self-reflection** and disconnecting from distractions has all at once unearthed and resolved worries, fears and regrets I didn't even know I had. I wonder if it's possible to involve other people and other perspectives in the process of reflection, to take the self out of it and broaden the human sources that flow into my personal pool of meaning. 

**Empathy** has been a key practice for me. I used to think that assuming I was wrong rather than right meant that I was putting my ego aside, but that can be its own form of ego. As someone once wrote, ego isn't thinking less of yourself, it's thinking of yourself less. Empathy has been the straightest way I've found to allocate more mental capacity to the perspectives of others and in the process think of myself less without thinking less of myself. I find the process of empathy both deeply frustrating and fulfilling, often both at the same time. Frustrating because my motives are often questioned, even by myself, but fulfilling because the insights and genuine human connection enabled by empathy are simply unmatched. It *is* possible to empathize misguidedly though, or to treat empathy as a solution, when it is often simply a means of seeking understanding and offering unconditional support. Hopefully experience will help me find the right balance. 











