---
layout: post
title:  "Struggle"
date:   2018-07-06 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*If you are going to ask yourself life-changing questions, be sure to do something with the answers.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Bo Bennett__  

I've been learning about many new concepts over the last few weeks, but one eternal question seems to hang over all of them. So much amazing research has been undertaken and published to explain the way we work and function, but we consistently fall prey to the same mechanics we seek to understand. Is it simply that we're so bound by the chemical and physical workings we work so hard to study that we can never break free of them? Or is it just a process that takes time and deliberate dedication?

I've consistently come across topics we've studied deeply enough to generate fountains of insight. Insight that we ignore or rarely apply to our day to day lives. 

Albert Bandura undertook a [<u>__Stanford study__</u>](https://www.uky.edu/~eushe2/Bandura/Bandura1977CTR-Adams.pdf "Albert Bandura's Phobia Study") in 1977, back when the most common treatment for phobias was therapy and discussion of the patient's past. He wanted to try a more active approach, so he gathered subjects who had suffered from an intense phobia of snakes for most of their lives. They had tried traditional treatment for years to no avail and were desperate enough to try something new, even if they had long since resigned themselves to living alongside their fears. 

To the surprise of everyone involved, Bandura included, the method they tested turned out to be  very effective. The methodology simply involved what we know of today as "deliberate practice". The subject would watch a researcher touch and handle a large snake through an open doorway, or a closed window if they were uncomfortable with the doorway. The subject would experience anxiety just watching the researcher interact with the snake, but within a few minutes the subject would already be comfortable approaching closer, eventually touching the snake themselves (With gloves on at first of course) and finally they were able to comfortably sit on a chair, petting the python in their lap. The entire process took an average of two hours, something years of traditional treatment had failed to accomplish, and every subject made it to the final stage succesfully. 

If we found a way to cure lifelong snake phobics of their paralyzing fear in two hours over 40 years ago, what's stopping us from practicing the same principles to work away our most debilitating present fears? Is it the very fear of addressing our fears?

This is what I'm curious about. This gap, this struggle between what we know and what we choose to do every day. I struggle to see why the two are so far apart. Perhaps that is my lifelong mission, to seek ways to close that gap for myself and others day by day by continually searching and refining my routines and choices. 

There's so much we don't know, but even more importantly, so much that we do know that we simply do not use. It's time to change that now. 






