---
layout: post
title:  "51%"
date:   2018-10-10 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*Nobody has ever learnt anything against their will.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Seth Godin__
 
An ex-colleague of mine and current friend and mentor Scott introduced me to this concept in passing one day. He told me that I didn't need to be 100% sure that something was right to start executing it, I just had to be 51% sure. I've been thinking about this lately and realized I've run with the concept. It relates back to the idea that we can't ever truly know anything, and we always have to make some assumptions to form the foundation of every choice. The least we can do is be conscious of those assumptions and understand how they shape our perspective. 

In that sense, being 51% sure may actually contribute to better flexibility and adaptibility than being 90% sure. If I'm 51% sure of something and I learn of a perspective or new information that makes me 49% or less sure of it, then it's an easy switch. There's no judgment of myself or feeling flip-floppy or going against what I believe. Being 51% sure allows me to suspend my personal preferences and perspective, whereas if I was 90% sure, I might be much more attached to the structure of the idea itself rather than its accuracy or practical value. 

It brings up the question, what if I could choose to be 51% sure of even the most foundational of assumptions I make? Personally, I make lots of assumptions and I've only recently been more aware of them. Information I learnt in my formative years has also formed the basis of many of my views and habits and I've only recently considered the possibility that they're flawed, or based on flawed information. For example, I grew up genuinely believing that computer usage and videogames caused damaged to the eyes' capability to focus on longer distances or simply function optimally. It [turns out](https://www.ted.com/talks/daphne_bavelier_your_brain_on_video_games?language=en "Daphne Bavelier - Your Brain on Video Games") that this may not be the case. I was surprised to find that this basic assumption I had internalized because of my cousin telling me as much was potentially flawed. It led me to question that surprise and wonder why it was so difficult for me to accept the new data and perspective. Part of it was the reluctance to accept data that is convenient or fits into making me feel better (I play videogames so it would be convenient for me if it turns out that they improve eyesight and vision in multiple ways), but a bias against data that's convenient to what we want is still a bias. 

I used to think that if we all have a natural bias to seek out the information we want to hear, then maybe a way to counteract that is to develop an equally opposed bias to spurn information that fits convienently in the way that we want. Now I'm beginning to see that simply being conscious of these inner workings and natural biases helps dispel them automatically. A key part of this is not judging the biases as good or bad, because the worse I believe a bias to be, the more likely I am to shy away from really looking at it as it is. The better I think a bias to be, the more likely I am to overestimate its impact or potentially be blind to its downsides. It's fascinating to me that perception seems to lie at the base of everything about ourselves, and the more capable we become of suspending judgment, the more accurate and honest our self-awareness grows to be. 
