---
layout: post
title:  "Trust"
date:   2018-07-23 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*The best way to find out if you can trust somebody is to trust them.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Ernest Hemingway__

Trust isn't necessarily about believing that someone is right or wrong. It can simply be believing that they have good intentions, because that alone is the foundation upon which all else can be built. Building trust isn't about making someone else see things like you do, it's about making yourself see things the way they do. Once you truly trust someone, it is inevitable for that trust to be recipocrated. 

I used to think that if I never trusted anyone, then I could never be betrayed or disappointed by others. I wasn't technically wrong, but I was absolutely wrong in the big picture. I didn't realize the cost I would bear in leading a life that way. Trust fulfills the truster as well as the trustee and all it takes is one person to reach out over the dark chasm and take a chance. It's inevitable that your trust will be broken at some point in life, but to be discouraged by that and choose not to trust, that is a choice one makes, a choice to live a life void of potential joy. Living without trust is merely surviving. Perhaps one of life's hardest challenge is building a deep trust in yourself, one that is solid enough to allow healthy self-doubt and change without judgement. It takes true trust in oneself to openly listen to the challenges of others and learn from them. 

So far the only way I've found to build self-trust is to make and keep commitments to myself over and over again, but maybe there are better ways out there. It's certainly a pursuit worthy of lifetimes.



