---
layout: post
title:  "Caring"
date:   2018-07-09 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*I don't simply want the quality measure to improve. I want to create a place filled with employees who care about quality. Just think what it would be like if employees, of their own initiative, were constantly making quality improvements—requiring little or no oversight—because they cared about quality the same as everyone in this room does.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Anonymous Manager__, *Influencer*

We are most at home when we're part of something bigger than ourselves, something meaningful we can genuinely care about. It's our natural state of being but we've gotten so used to being shunned or doubted when we care that we brush it aside in favour of doing what we're told exactly as prescribed. Cynicism becomes our shield against disappointment. 

The good news is we can change that anytime. I came to care genuinely about the last place I worked at, especially about the people I worked with, but I was met with doubt, condescension or indifference at first. Doubts about my "true" agenda, condescension towards my perceived arrogance (*Who does he think he is?*), or indifference because nothing would change anyway, right? 

I won't lie, it was hard to keep caring in the face of resistance like that, especially since plenty of those doubts came from me. But something inside of me kept me going as I kept reaching out and did everything I could to empathize and look for ways to improve our lives. I never realized it until my last few days there, but my persistence had melted many of the doubts and worries over time. People began to realize that I really meant what I said and wanted to help change things for the better, even if it meant short-term pain and sacrifice. We became more open and I found that colleagues who didn't usually get along were brought closer together by genuinely caring for a common cause again. It was stuttering and inconsistent progress, but it was progress nevertheless. 

I can't imagine a single industry, company, family, or friendship that couldn't benefit from an extra dose of genuine caring. Too many places encourage internal competition and CYA (Cover Your Ass), but I say embrace collaboration regardless of the reward systems in place, regardless of the mandates—hold yourself and others accountable because you genuinely care and it will pay out immeasurable dividends far beyond this quarter or the next. 

Sometimes we can't change the systems that encourage and reward our poor behaviour, but we can care genuinely to change our behaviour enough to make them obsolete, forcing the creation of healthier systems and incentives instead. 



