---
layout: post
title:  "Quotewriter"
date:   2018-11-03 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---
When I was younger I wanted to grow up to be a professional quotewriter. I imagined buildings filled with people frantically pumping out inspiring, provocative, thoughtful quotes day in and day out, flooding the world with all these quotes I seemed to come across so often. I didn't realize that a) quotes trickle down to the present from the past as time passes, often with historical significance and b) that the people who said or wrote the words that became quotes rarely, if ever, set out to be quoted. Rather, they were students of life and shared their ideas and thoughts with the world, ideas that often ended up being significant enough to quote. I hadn't yet realized that the quotes were just a byproduct of a myriad of intersections; knowledge, experience, questioning, self-reflection, inspiration and sometimes just comical fitness. 

We often take for granted that success as we imagine it is the end, and everything we set out to do is to achieve it. We do this despite all the perspectives floating around that success as we define it is often a byproduct of other forms of growth, learning and progress; that fulfillment itself may be the process that churns out success as a byproduct. What then is the primary product of our lives, of fulfillment? I've come across many different perspectives: One is that meaning is completely subjective, and so success is however we define it—although it certainly doesn't hurt to have money along for the ride—and that success will take on many forms for the outside world, but for the individual it will be quite clear when they aren't fulfilled. Another is that the goal of living is to grow our capacity to love. Yet another is to be morally good, to serve others and to leave a legacy worth dying for. Another might be the idea that life itself is worth the intrinsic experience, regardless of its ratio of joy:pain, and that any ratio we end up living out is just as subjectively good as any other. It certainly seems possible to achieve any of these forms of meaning while being either traditionally successful or not. In fact, I'm not even sure if traditional success is always helpful, but it seems like we often assume it to be. After all, money is always nice, right? 

I wonder if that's not always the case. How easy is it for us to take a cookie and want another? To start measuring our progress in cookies once we've earned one from the jar and tasted its chocolatey, crumbly goodness?  It does seem like the challenge with detachment is that it isn't about owning nothing, but rather being owned by nothing. What would it take to taste a cookie for the first time and not be overcome by its sweetness and instinctively reach out for another? What would it take to be conscious of that entire process while we're experiencing it, to notice the way our mind shapes itself to seek pleasure and avoid pain? It feels like once that consciousness exists, pleasure and pain look like two very close friends, both equally dashing. The fascinating irony seems to be that once we can embrace pain and suffering, we often end up stumbling upon more joy and fulfillment because we're less distracted by our ever-looming need to avoid failure, rejection, hurt, sorrow and suffering. It's so freeing but I never realized how much my fear of hurting others or looking stupid actually got in the way of feeling fulfilled and genuinely interacting with people from that place of fulfillment. I had no idea human beings were even capable of this kind of state of being, and now I guess I wonder why I had no idea. What is it about the way we're raised that teaches us to tie results to states of being? The very culture that made it all too easy for me to assume that quotes were mass-produced by special quotewriters seems to be the same culture that blinded me to the potential of our minds and our consciousness, to the very idea that there are experiences out there that are indescribably human and worth experiencing, even (especially) if they aren't always "happy" ones.