---
layout: post
title:  "Doing vs. Being Test"
date:   2018-10-13 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*It made a huge shift for me in how I decided to be present in the moment and not run away from the lizard [brain], to not run away from those things that scared me but to dance with them instead.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Seth Godin__
 
I used to genuinely believe that my value as a human being was based on my actions. Lately I've come to ponder a different perspective; what if our value never changes, and our actions are merely byproducts of our being? I've been running into many paradoxes lately. I started out with all of this inward reflection in the hopes of becoming a better human being, but lately I've realized that it's my perception of myself that has changed far more than my actual self. I haven't gotten that much "better" but my view of myself has become much less judgmental and more at peace. Oddly enough, the side-effect of that seems to have been more genuine interactions, inspiring moments with other human beings, and fulfilling connections and gratitude. I no longer judge those as good though, at least not in the sense that I actively pursue them. They just seem to be byproducts of the process of living in the present moment without guilt or worry but rather acceptance. The paradox lies in the fact that everything I was pursuing so heavily really came to me when I genuinely ceased to want them, and yet once they began happening, they were no longer rewarding, since I had ceased to judge them as well. Writing it down, it sounds like the opposite of what we're taught to strive for; the pursuit of happiness. This idea that we need to want things, and that in pursuing what we want and getting what we want, we will live in the process of happiness. 

I no longer find that to be true. I feel this sense of quietude in just being, and I no longer feel rewarded in the same way by the things I used to find pleasure in: Serving others, earning their respect, validation and admiration, being around people I admire, making money, feeling like I'm making a positive impact, and feeling intelligent, productive and capable. It may sound bleak, but it's hard to describe the consistent feeling of just being that envelops me these days. There's something about the peace of mind and unperturbedness that feels so natural. It feels like all the rewarding pleasures I used to pursue will still naturally happen as byproducts of my being, but they are no longer necessary to fuel my self-worth or sense of accomplishment, which have simply ceased to exist. 

On the flip side, things I often used to judge as negative are no longer bad and are no longer sources of sorrow for me: Feeling lazy, dumb, unproductive, being wrong, feeling ashamed or unrespected, feeling inferior, feeling like I don't belong, feeling like I'm hurting others, feeling like the world is a bleak place or that life isn't worth living, feeling like the only way to gain is to take from others and that the world is one large zero-sum game. Many of these feelings have vanished entirely, much like many of the "positive" feelings above, but of the ones that remain, they no longer seem so negative to me. They just seem like perspectives and emotions just as valid as any other, and they no longer impact the core of my being or my consistent life experience. It's interesting to write about it this way, it's almost like ego as I knew it has been dissolved.
 
Rather than judging the nature of things, I've found myself content to simply experience them. 
