---
layout: post
title:  "Rewards"
date:   2018-07-10 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*You get what you reward. Be clear about what you want to get and systematically reward it.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Bob Nelson__

Think of a company at which you've worked, or one you currently work at. Imagine the energy of the environment, the way it made you feel to be there. Think of the way others around you behaved, and the way you felt like behaving when you were there. Many little factors caused it to form the way it did, to become what you experience when you're there, and none of it happened by accident. 

No matter how flawed and mangled (or healthy and energizing) a culture ends up, it's never a one-way trip. A corporate culture requires maintenace constantly, and it feeds off the very people it envelops, the very people who fuel it and give it a reason to exist. We aren't bystanders, victims, or even lucky recipients of the culture we find ourselves in. We are active, willing participants, albeit sometimes blind to this fact. 

How it looks at any given moment is simply a culmination of the aggregate behaviour of its participants. Our past behaviour, yes, but more impactfully,  our continuing, day-to-day behaviour. Culture has a quick metabolism and old behaviour is quickly written over by new. However, since our behaviour is heavily dictated by rewards and punishments, if our incentives or priorities haven't changed much, neither will our behaviour, and neither will the culture we find ourselves living. 

The most obvious of these incentives is pay, and the most obvious of the disincentives could be harsh criticism or the looming threat of being fired. There are many factors that we don't account for though, not for a lack of knowledge, but for a lack of respect. We underestimate the impact they have on our behaviour, because it can be hard to admit that we are vulnerable to others, that we do need to feel a sense of belonging. It's only human. 

The reality is there is a wide range of behaviour we could exhibit within the range of receiving our pay and getting fired. These seemingly small factors are a massive influence on where our behaviour ends up within that range, because the two large factors at either end are static behemoths that don't shift nearly as much. We end up taking them as a given and start to be more influenced by smaller factors.

We're often constantly pushing the envelope in subtle ways, testing the waters to see how behaviour is rewarded or punished. We might bring up something slightly taboo at a meeting and gauge the room's reaction. If we sense enthusiasm and a healthy reception to it, we might go further next time. But if we're met with rolling eyes or an uncomfortable silence, if we sense fear in the room, we might backtrack and make a mental note never to do that again. After all, why would we ever want to feel that way, or make others feel that way again? 

If you make a mistake one day and find yourself admitting to it sheepishly in a meeting with your boss later that day, how might she react? If she seethes at you and responds in a voice dripping with venom, "How stupid could you be? You had just one job to do! Ugh, get out of here and don't let it happen again." how would you feel about your mistake? *Phew, that was close, I can't mess up again.* Of course, you're human, so you make a mistake again, perhaps even the same one (it happens!), and you start to beat yourself up over it. You might also feel the need to cover it up, or fix it before anyone notices, and of course that might just cause more issues down the road. Not only do you start working inefficiently to do everything you can to avoid mistakes, you start to take your mistakes to heart and blaming your "stupidity" whenever they happen. This crushes your spirit and messes with your enjoyment of work. 

If she shakes her head disappointedly and responds, "Please don't let it happen again," you might feel disappointed yourself and nod in agreement, "I won't." Of course, you might make the same mistake again, but you'd feel terrible about doing so and would hate the feeling of disappointing your boss and yourself again. You'd end up in a similar situation where behaviour such as kicking creativity out of the room when you work and hiding or covering up mistakes is indirectly rewarded, because you know how you're made to feel when you don't resort to such methods. The worst part is you might take these feelings as a given—Mistakes *should* feel this way, shouldn't they? My boss *should* be disappointed in me. These lessons we learn early in life are awful at encouraging true long term happiness and productivity. 

If instead she looks at you for a few moments with eyes that seem to say, "I understand—I've been there too" and then responds, "I appreciate your honesty. I'm glad you brought this to my attention. I don't blame you for what happened. Please take some time to think about it and let's meet again to discuss your ideas on how we could improve at this in the future, as I'm sure we're not perfect in how we enable your work either. I'd love to work with you to improve the way we do this, and anything else, so that it's better for all of us moving forward."

How would you feel?

Now is it unrealistic for me to expect this from every leader? I don't think so. I think this is much more in line with human nature than we might think, once we look past the poor habits we've picked up over a lifetime in a flawed set of work cultures. It's all very learnable, and we already know that it leads to better results than letting one's ego get in the way of doing the right thing.

As a final note, I think our default behaviours are very positive. In the absence of all unnecessary disincentives, especially social ones (Such as the rolling-eyes response), I genuinely believe that we are naturally inclined to pour ourselves into caring about our work and making a real difference. We don't even require extra financial incentives to do so, as I would argue that the extra work it would take to give it our all would be intrinsically rewarding and fulfilling to us. We literally exist to make an impact, the bigger and more positive, the better we feel about it. This is an incentive that is much harder to create than simply writing a cheque, but it always exists for all of us, and when we feel it, we move beyond trading our time for money into the territory of feeling like we belong to something larger than ourselves.

Sometimes all that's required to see it is to take away the silly punishments we don't even realize we inflict on those who try to be genuine and take risks out of a sense of caring for what they do. We might even find that those who didn't seem to care suddenly do display a sense of caring. They were just waiting for it to feel safe before they could bring their true selves out of hiding.





