---
layout: post
title:  "Envy"
date:   2018-07-27 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*Do not overrate what you have received, nor envy others. He who envies others does not obtain peace of mind.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Gautama Buddha__ 

Interestingly enough, certain languages such as Dutch, German, and Portuguese have two separate words for two kinds of envy, colloquially referred to as black envy and white envy. A series of studies also found that cultures that distinguished between the two kinds of envy often also more productively channelled their envy and understood it better too. 

Black envy is malicious and wishes harm upon the person who is the target of envy, leading to schadenfreude when misfortune befalls them. White envy on the other hand is more focused on what exactly the envied has that the envier wants, and looks toward how the envier can achieve it themselves. It's not necessarily about harm befalling the envied, but pursuing fortune and success for the envier. Seeing a coworker get a promotin over you and hoping they mess up on their project and get reprimanded is a form of black envy, while experiencing white envy might inflame you and motivate you to work hard to get the next promotion. Of course, you could experience both together and work hard to show them up and get what you want too.

What's fascinating is that simply putting two separate words to these concepts instead of bundling them into one changes the way people behave. That's the lesson I'd like to take away from this concept. That we can choose to be more intricate with our understanding of things, and the deeper we go, the less we simplify, the more precisely we can affect how we implement that understanding. Simply understanding this concept of envies brought a new kind of awareness to me when I felt either kind in different situations, often allowing me to choose white envy over black where I might have defaulted differently in the past. Being aware of this now also means I'll be looking at concepts I usually take for granted from a new perspective, one based on the base elements that make up the concept rather than the pre-packaged whole to which I've become accustomed. 





