---
layout: post
title:  "Wants Vs. Needs"
date:   2018-12-13 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

I seem to be coming across this often lately, maybe because I've been thinking about it a lot. Our desires are often sourced by our ideas of happiness and fulfillment, and our beliefs about how we can maximize them. We pursue external results to hit internal emotional targets. Yet we repeatedly might find that our emotional reaction to external circumstances is unpredictable to us and rarely unfolds the way we expect. The most recent place I came across this idea again was in this article by Happy City: [The psychology of 'no'.](https://nationalpost.com/news/canada/the-psychology-of-no-vancouver-residents-poised-to-make-a-decision-that-will-corrode-their-happiness "The psychology of 'no'")

Dan Gilbert's research also covers this extensively. We are terrible at genuinely understanding and predicting what will make us happy, and conversely how miserable we will be in the face of suffering and misfortune. It turns out we're much more resilient than we give ourselves credit for, and we tend to pursue things that feel familiar rather than things that will add to our fulfillment. We're also notoriously defensive when it comes to admitting our own biases and flaws when it comes to making decisions and choices for ourselves. Sometimes our ego gets in the way and we insist on what we want not because it'll make us happy, but because it's what we want. Most of the time though, we genuinely believe that what we want is what will make us happy. We may not always realize this assumption we make because when someone challenges that link and points out that exactly what we don't want might just make us happier than what we believe we want. The wording is tough here, and I've temporarily settled on the words "want" and "need". I'll have to figure out better language eventually.

"Want": Our external goal that we believe will lead to our intrinsic need, whether that's fulfillment or some other emotional target. 

"Need": The instrinsic need that our desire is built upon. 

An example might be that I need to feel approval from my boss. So I want to do well on a project to make him proud. I might even want to work really hard for a promotion, and I might genuinely believe that the promotion is what I want. Yet it might turn out that I get the promotion but still feel like I haven't earned by boss' approval. In that case, I will still feel hollow and unfulfilled. My want was met while my need wasn't. 

The interesting thing is once we are able to separate our target emotion from our target external goal, more effective ways to hit that emotional target become clear to us. It's like we realize what's really important to us. I think this is what happens when we're faced with opportunities to realize our true priorities, such as when a close friend or relative faces a life-threatening condition. 

We tend to lie to ourselves quite often though. Sometimes we're afraid of admitting our true needs and we mask it with our wants, using them as a shield to push forward without facing our real goals. I guess that's fair considering the society we've built. If I openly said that I was working hard to earn my boss' approval, I might be met with judgment and potential questioning of my character. It's tough to admit our nature because we're taught to supress it and try to be someone else with goals that aren't always truly human. Even the shallowest possible goal we can think of ties itself back to a very real, deep intrinsic emotional need of some sort. The sooner we can make ourselves aware of that, the more fulfilled we will be in the longterm. 