---
layout: post
title:  "Destitution Vs. Luxury."
date:   2018-11-26 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

I've come to realize that comfort and luxury were some of the biggest obstacles in my pursuit for a people-focused company culture. The more I was paid, the harder it was to speak up and criticize our culture or how I was expected to get results. To challenge the implicit assumptions we were making, I had to overcome this implicit bias I felt where I conflated fiduciary duty with a need to turn a blind eye or accept certain aspects of how we functioned. The reality is the more comfortable I got financially, the harder this became to do. The more afraid I was of losing my job, the less capable I was of honesty. The day I quit was essentially the day I felt this, even if I couldn't word it so well back then. I could feel myself picking up flawed habits and being shaped into someone I didn't know I could become. It felt like once I was no longer afraid to be destitute or poor, that once my identity and self-worth wasn't tied to my financial success, I was able to prioritize what really mattered to me and make decisions based on those values. The funny side-effect seemed to be that I did better on traditional metrics too, and I began finding opportunities to earn money doing work in ways I loved rather than doing work in ways that left me feeling ineffective and dishonest. 

Destitution and poverty have always implicitly been passed down as some of our greatest threats, and much of my life was spent actively avoiding them and instead pursuing luxury and comfort. What nobody really taught me was how threatening luxury could also be to my long-term fulfillment and growth. Having the things I thought I wanted made it harder to pursue the things I really wanted, especially if I had to risk the things I thought I wanted, like financial stability. Most of the world teaches us that it's crazy to risk our material wealth for something intangible, or to expect the pursuit of intangibles such as trust from a business, but I've found the exact opposite to be true. Not every business out there exists to make money, and surprisingly some of the most financially succesful ones don't even pursue money. It's a byproduct of their need to grow and make a sustainable difference in the lives of their people and the world. I was taught the benefits of "the good life" but never the potential drawbacks and cognitive pits I could fall into. It became very easy to be complacent and even blame myself for not being happy if I had everything that people said you should want to be happy. It was an unhealthy feedback loop where I was so focused on just one set of factors that I couldn't see all the others I had simply not been prioritizing, such as serving others and putting people first. All of that was only capable of becoming clear to me when I let go of the need to be rich. 