---
layout: post
title:  "Love"
date:   2018-10-30 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---
I've come across this interesting idea of love that seems to explain a lot of the experiences I've been having. It's fascinating, this idea that love is nothing but unconditional acceptance, and the emotion of love that we experience is just a sliver of that infinite love. Love encompasses everything, and even what we perceive as hatred or violence is love; it's a different form of love, self-love generated by our ego that creates boundaries and a bubble for us to exist inside of and battle those outside of it. Hatred is just love that's contained within our fences and chained up to the doghouse. 

We find it easy to love the things that please us, that please our egos, like beauty, pleasure, wealth, fame and validation. We find it much harder to love the things that challenge our ego and our perspective, like suffering, ugliness, discomfort, poverty and disagreements. I've realized that subconsciously that's been getting easier for me and I've become much more enamoured by the beauty of the present moment and my present experience, to the point where judging things one way or the other doesn't reward me anymore. It's become natural to question my knee-jerk judgments, both favourable and unfavourable, and start to choose to experience both pleasure and suffering consciously to enjoy them both as rewarding experiences worth having. Life is beautiful, and in many ways so is death. Everything we've ever experienced and will ever experience is worth experiencing. 

A huge part of this is self-love and self-acceptance, which can be tough. We're taught by our culture to supress parts of ourselves and judge ourselves, to measure our "good" and work to extend it while shrinking our "bad". Funnily enough, this has the opposite effect; we end up repressing and denying the parts of ourselves we're most afraid of and so they never see the light of day consciously. Unconsciously, they continue to work away at our actions and our choices with no hesitation or weakening. One of the greatest favours we can do to our biases and dogma and judgments is to keep them subconscious, to keep them unexamined and unquestioned. One of the greatest favours we can do to ourselves is to accept them, to love them the same way we love our most ego-pleasing qualities. Oddly enough, in doing so, we might find that they don't naturally exist anymore. Many of my greatest "negative" qualities ceased to exist when I stopped judging them as bad because they just weren't a natural part of a judgment free existence for me. When I was no longer afraid of hurting people, I became much more likely to help them without fear of failure. It feels like I get to be myself even when the world or even my ego punishes me for it, and enjoy that entire process regardless of how it feels. 