---
layout: post
title:  "Bikeshedding"
date:   2018-11-31 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Also known as the [Law of Triviality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_triviality "Wikipedia - Law of Triviality"), this is a really interesting concept to me. Essentially the less important an issue, the more we will argue, deliberate and be committed to our stance on it. I think it often boils down to two things: When we feel qualified to give our input, we are more likely to do so. Seems obvious, but the second point might not be; when we truly *are* qualified to give input, but nobody around is and doesn't care enough to seem to want to learn, then we are much more likely to be quiet and let the issue pass, even if we have input we believe potentially valuable. These two combine to create a dangerous environment where people feel the need to address this problem with solutions that potentially progress us backwards. Requiring input from every member of the team before moving on, for example, can be a recipe for shallow and reluctant input without any real caring. It reminds me of that idea that to get people building a boat, ordering them around to chop down trees and start sawing is not nearly as powerful as teaching them to yearn for the endless sea. We've gotten so used to implementing systems that essentially amount to mandating human progress rather than actually encouraging human growth by making ourselves vulnerable first.

Atwood's Duck, in the related principles section of the above Wikipedia article, talks about a countermeasure "duck" in programming where a programmer expects the corporate office to want to implement at least one change to feel "impactful" or feel like they're participating actively, so the programmer presents the prototype with at least one feature that they expect corporate to remove. We can sometimes end up moving so far along this principle that when truly valuable input presents itself, our default response is to nod, consider it momentarily, then forget it immediately. Even the person giving the input may be completely satisfied by that response because they're so used to it. Of course this would lead to dissatisfaction and a lack of fulfillment from work. How can a project go anywhere when we start resorting to short-term solutions like this? The first step is addressing the root of the issue and figuring out how to bring enough psychological safety to the table to make people free to be themselves and mess up in the short-term to grow as human beings in the long-term.