---
layout: post
title:  "Labels"
date:   2018-07-15 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*Blaming people’s internal essence rather than their external behavior leaves no room for change.* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Kim Scott__, *Radical Candor*

Does letting loose an angry remark make you an angry person?

Does giving someone a hand make you a caring person?

Does making a stupid mistake make you a stupid person?

Does judging people make you a judgemental person?

Of course not. We are not the sum total of our past behaviour. To believe that we are only fuels the self-fulfilling prophecy for ourselves, and to believe others are only does the same on their behalf. This is one of the realms where we are genuinely harsher with others than we are with ourselves, simply because we intrinsically understand our intentions, while we often misunderstand the intentions of others. Not for a lack of intelligence, mind you, but simply because the lie, the label we apply, justifies our reactions. We're perfectly capable of telling the good story, often the most realistic story to explain why someone does something we don't understand, but how could we justify our outrage then? 

What defines you is right now. No moment before it even comes close. We are always learning. There is nothing stopping us from directing that learning at the very base of our mindsets to change the way we formulate thoughts, opinions and judgements. Nothing of course, but our own disbelief at the idea that we could change who we are. 

Start by suspending judgements of others and you will find yourself understanding them and perhaps even yourself better over time. Give people a chance to amaze you and I guarantee you that they will. Labels only serve to blind us to change, to progress, until we become the very chains binding us to to the iron ball of our expectations. 

You might be surprised at who you find yourself to be when you cease to worry about who you were or who you should be. 







