---
layout: post
title:  "Social Animals"
date:   2018-07-21 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*“We human beings are social beings. We come into the world as the result of others’ actions. We survive here in dependence on others. Whether we like it or not, there is hardly a moment of our lives when we do not benefit from others’ activities. For this reason, it is hardly surprising that most of our happiness arises in the context of our relationships with others.”* 
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Dalai Lama XIV__

I had the opportunity to catch up with an old friend from high school today. We see each other every few months and I've always found his perspective very valuable, often because it directly contrasts mine. In high school one time we got embroiled in a discussion about the purpose of a post-secondary education, and what he said has stuck with me ever since: *School teaches you how to learn*. I ended up taking the words to heart, but I replaced with school with life instead. That discussion we had cemented in me a life-long awareness of the question, *Am I getting better at learning?*, which I ask myself whenever I'm having doubts about what I'm doing in life. If the answer is no, that often pushes me to look aggressively for ways to turn that into a yes. 

Now over 8 years later, it felt good to catch up and learn from his experiences in the real world. I found that many of the things I mentioned from the books I've been reading were already at the forefront of his mind from his experience working at different engineering firms. He spoke of how he used to think that as long as he was doing work he enjoyed, he could be content with his job. After experiencing two jobs where he found the work about equally enjoyable, but felt differing levels of fulfillment from the time he spent there, he began to realize the value in people and social interactions. Although his tasks were similar at both jobs, he felt happier with colleagues who interacted with him and each other often, as opposed to focusing on the task at hand and neglecting everything else. He felt free to be himself and bring his whole self to work, rather than just one facet (the professional) of who he was. Part of this was because the team and work was situated in a relatively remote area, encouraging socialization between colleagues outside of work at communal events such as dinners and barbeques. In way it was very much accidental, but he realized the difference in how he felt at work when this factor of social bonding came into play. He had thought the nature of the work would matter most, but came to see that the quality of relationships between colleagues mattered heavily too. 

Everything I'm studying is to figure out how we can make this more than an accident, to consciously encourage and sustain an environment that makes people feel free to be themselves and transcend the *what* of their work into the *how* of their team's approach to it. The difficulty of course lies in the differences in perspectives. This was my friend's, but I've talked to people who would hate a workplace that encouraged social interaction, and would instead prefer to do their work in peace alone. The eternal challenge of bringing human beings together will be creating an environment flexible enough to allow each person to communicate openly to have their individual needs satisfied, which I believe will automatically lead to an effective contribution to the organization's goals as a whole. Companies are starting to realize this value in placing culture-first and as our understanding grows, we're only going to get better at it. Companies that place culture second are going to start falling behind as people gain confidence in the fact that they can and *should* expect more from their work, not just for themselves, but for the difference their work makes in the world too. 

