---
layout: post
title:  "True Service"
date:   2018-10-24 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

>*You find yourself when you lose yourself in the service of others.*
 <br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; Mahatma Gandhi__
 
There's nothing special about wanting to give. That's what makes it so powerful. Somehow our culture has made it special, but the reality is for the vast majority of us, serving others is one of the most fulfilling ways to spend our time. It's not necessarily what we do, but how and why we do it that contributes most our rationale of service. Two people could be doing the exact same job, but depending on how they feel about it and how they rationalize its positive impact on the world, it could feel much more like service to one person than the other.

There is no objective good, but we feel best when we spot signs that we're fulfilling other people and contributing to what they find meaningful in a way that aligns with our personal values. Perspective is everything, and meaning is very subjective. In a way, we're all selfishly selfless, or selflessly selfish, however you'd like to word it. The people we perceive as selfless are often those who have built a state of being where they can help others and feel good doing it. Unfortunately, many of us are also raised to be a different kind of selfless; self-sacrificial to our own detriment, setting ourselves on fire to warm those around us. The key to service is sustainability, and much of service is long-term greed. When we serve the best interests of the world, we also serve our own best interests. 

This is part of why when we look out only for ourselves, we harm ourselves more than when we look out for those around us too. The fear and distrust and worry and self-interest hurt us far more than we realize in the long run, but sometimes we feel like we have no other choice. I need to figure  out how we can change that feeling for the vast majority of people, so that self-interest and short-term decisionmaking can be a conscious choice rather than feel like our only option to succeed. When given the freedom to perceive that choice, I think we'd make many choices differently. We would put people ahead of egos and empathy ahead of blame. And yes, we'd make more money doing it too, because we'd genuinely contribute to the fulfillment of ourselves and those around us. Work produced in an environment of trust and collaboration is much more meaningfully impactful and creatively inspired than work produced in an environment of self-interest and competition. This is part of the beauty of changing the way we define results; when we define results by the way the people around us feel, or as Benjamin Zander puts it, *By the number of sparkling eyes around me*, we fulfill the traditional form of results being profit, impact and growth, but we also go beyond it to imbue a long-term sustainability and fulfillment into ourselves and the people around us.

The hard part isn't learning to exist this way and prioritize this, but rather learning that it's a real option.