---
layout: post
title:  "Empathy First"
date:   2019-05-14 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Our current cultural/social approach in North America to criminals, addicts, the obese and the homeless is sorely lacking in empathy and ultimately counterproductive to reducing crime, addiction, obesity and homelessness rates. 

These 4 categories may seem unrelated but I would like to make the argument that they are all connected by a cultural lack of willingness to understand/empathize. I'm not saying that learning to empathize with them will solve the problem by itself, but I am saying that it is the key first step to directing our resources and energy in a productive way that maximizes the results we seek (reducing these rates).

We currently direct too much energy blaming the character of individuals rather than examining the complexity of the circumstances in which they are immersed—circumstances which as a whole contribute to the existence of these problems much more than any individual choices do. Empathizing with these members of our society is not about enabling or condoning their behavior, but rather seeking to understand and humanize them so that we can better address the problem in its infancy. If we were to grow up in their conditions or be subject to their circumstances, it is very likely we would make the same choices they do. To expect them to change their behavior by sheer willpower alone without addressing their circumstances is like tossing a pebble into the sun. 

I believe that the bulk of our long-term results in reducing these rates will come from our efforts to address these systemic and environmental issues at the early stages of the problem. There is plenty of overlap between them when approached this way, and by understanding the key contributors to each of them, we can design our education, social care, and legal systems to best eliminate them. Our greatest incentive to approach it this way will come from growing our capacity to empathize and begin to understand and view their experiences as if they were our own.


- **Criminality:** The line that separates productive members of society from those that commit crimes is not always one of character or lack of morals. Often it is one of circumstance and environment. Very few criminals are pathological, i.e. physically or mentally "broken". The vast majority of them are just like us as human beings. Our current implicit approach of viewing ourselves as "good people" who are separate from those "bad people" leads to the dehumanization of criminals, which makes it difficult for us to address the root cause of the issue. Too often as a culture we allow ourselves to view justice as a form of mob vengeance or punishment. Rather than look at how we can cause the most appropriate harm or suffering to a criminal to make them pay for their crimes, we should look at what actions will have the greatest long-term good for society. Sometimes that will involve punishment, but sometimes that will also involve understanding and a genuine desire to rehabilitate and help someone with no bitterness or resentment from our end, treating them as we would want to be treated if we ever found ourselves desperate enough to commit a crime. Furthermore, wouldn't we rather have a criminal pay for their crimes by contributing "good" back to society as restitution rather than by inflicting "bad" upon them instead? This is the principle upon which Mimi Silbert's [Delancey Street Foundation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delancey_Street_Foundation) is run. A self-sustaining rehabilitation organization, their methods humanize their residents and enable them to grow as people. "Silbert refers to Delancey Street's approach as mutual restitution: 'The residents gain the vocational, personal, interpersonal and social skills necessary to make restitution to the society from which they have taken illegally, consistently and often brutally, for most of their lives. In return Delancey Street demands from society access to the legitimate opportunities from which the majority of residents have been blocked for most of their lives.'" 

- **Addiction:** Many Delancey Street residents are deeply embroiled in drug addictions when they first join, and yet they suddenly find themselves willingly accepting a strict no drug policy. As per [Johann Hari's talk on understanding addiction](https://www.ted.com/talks/johann_hari_everything_you_think_you_know_about_addiction_is_wrong?language=en) where he states "The opposite of addiction isn't sobriety, it's community", the foundation relies heavily on community to combat addiction. Each new resident is immediately made the responsibility of the second-newest member under an "Each One Teach One" policy. So a recovering addict on his very first day is being shown around by someone just as new as he is, when suddenly the addict is assigned a slightly newer resident for whom he is now responsible. This focus on responsibility for others enables addicts to combat their own addiction by encouraging others, which may seem unintuitive but works quite well in practice. In the field of addiction I would say our culture is advancing reasonably quickly as we realize that the War on Drugs has failed and that we need to design a radically different approach. We have also begun to realize the resulting value in helping addicts by unconditionally providing safe spaces and clean equipment to inject themselves. Many of them choose to accept offers of rehabilitation or begin to wean themselves off their addiction by personal choice. Recent [news from Mexico](https://www.newsweek.com/mexico-decriminalize-drugs-negotiate-us-1421395) also pointed towards a potential approach where all drugs are decriminalized and power is taken from illegal manufacturers, distributors and racketeering gangs who use the illegality and short supply of drugs to control their territories. By legally producing and supplying drugs itself at much lower prices and removing the stigma of addiction, the government hopes to address the problem in a healthier way and enable addicts to seek help without judgment. On a more personal note, often we feel that to support an addict as a human being is to enable their addiction. It is possible to value and love someone while being clear that you do not condone their behaviour. It is possible to define a human being by more than their addiction and offer them community and support unconditionally without enabling their habit. Sometimes this is just the approach a family member or friend requires from us to find the strength to combat their addiction. The physical suffering of withdrawal is onerous enough; the last thing an addict is helped by is the social and cultural pain of judgment and isolation as well. 

- **Obesity:** This is a category where we might feel that personal choice plays a large role. The way I see it however, if I live in a community where there are more McDonald's than grocery stores, where drive-thru's make that experience more palatable than walk-in grocery shopping, and where fast food is much cheaper than healthy eating, it makes perfect sense for me to eat McDonald's on a regular basis. If tap water isn't safe and bottled water happens to be two or three times more expensive, the path of least resistance seems to be to stock my fridge up with soda and drink that regularly. It even tastes better! Sign me up. If there are no parks nearby, why go through the effort of driving to spend some time at one? I might feel the same way about gyms or sports. Combine that with the fact that I might not have been fully exposed to the nutritional harm in the easiest lifestyle that I can follow, and plenty of people around me seem to live it just fine, why shouldn't I live this way? It seems perfectly reasonable. I may never even have reason to question it until someone or something in I watch or read brings it up. From this perspective can we really blame someone who is obese for simply not losing weight? If we were to swap bodies with an obese person, how easy would it be for us to lose weight? How uncomfortable would it be to try and how comforting would it be to resign ourselves to our lifestyle and habits? How much more likely would we be to eat healthily if it was cheaper, or if delivery was convenient? What about if gym memberships were more affordable, if our circle of family and friends encouraged us positively rather than trying to motivate us through negative judgments? A great book exploring the subject of environmental factors in trying to change one's habits is [Change Anything](https://www.amazon.ca/Change-Anything-Science-Personal-Success/dp/0446573906) by VitalSmarts, a team of researchers who went out to find people who were exceptionally successful at changing themselves. They studied them in detail and realized that the results were surprisingly unintuitive at first. These subjects did not rely on willpower to change themselves, but instead focused on identifying the factors in their lives that were influencing them to continue their habits. Everything we do by default is because it's easy, and mentally trying to take the harder route every time is much more inefficient than simply changing the route we take, or making the harder route easier. A real life example from the book was about a man who was trying to lose weight. He noticed that after particularly stressful days at work, he would grab a few Wendy's burgers on the way home instead of cooking dinner. Rather than feeling guilty, admonishing himself, and swearing never to do it again (this is how many of us would respond by default), he simply decided to change his route home so that it didn't pass any fast food restaurants. All of a sudden he found himself consistently cooking dinner at home and even began enjoying it as a way to de-stress and relax after a long day of work. Too many of us would view this approach as a form of weakness, but the reality is it leads to results far better than relying on willpower alone.

- **Homelessness:** This category may already be quite easy for many of us to empathize with. I've come across many a comment on reddit from people who were homeless themselves and appreciated help and support they received from others to get back on their feet. Almost everything I've written for the previous categories apply here. I would urge us to question our default rush to judgment if we ever feel it, such as viewing someone as lazy or weak-willed rather than seeking to understand their circumstances. I understand some of this hatred is also directed at those who fake homelessness or poverty to extract money from tourists or the unaware, but I again urge you to seek to understand their perspective. Very, very few people (if any) are malicious by nature, and most are simply doing what they genuinely believe is their best with what they've got. We really do judge others by their actions but ourselves by our intentions, and if we can believe that our intentions are almost always good, then we must be able to realize how everyone else also believes that about themselves. To empathize with someone is not to enable their wrongdoing, but rather to seek to understand their motivations and circumstances to address the root-cause of the issue rather than just its symptoms.

Our current lack of empathy in our understanding of these seemingly distinct categories is the common thread that connects them all. Empathy is also the foundation of any meaningful long-term solution. 

