---
layout: post
title:  "Nonsense"
date:   2019-05-08 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

If someone is capable of thinking it, it's not nonsense. No matter how nonsensical it seems to us, it makes sense to somebody, and until we can understand exactly how it makes perfect, reasonable sense to someone, we cannot unilaterally declare it nonsense. We can find reasons to dislike it, disagree with it, even denounce it, but to denigrate it as lacking all rational sense is to make the very same mistake we accuse the bearer of "nonsense". 

Our minds are filled with double standards like these that are so obvious and intrinsic to us that we barely question them. The more we empathize with the people we find hardest to relate to and easiest to judge, the better we become at turning these impossible standards upon ourselves and realizing just how flawed they are. We begin to treat ourselves and others as human beings worthy of understanding. The irony is that if you want to convince someone their idea is nonsense, convincing yourself it's not is the best place to start. The best way to change someone's mind is to begin by changing yours, because when someone feels truly understood, it's only natural for them to be curious about your perspective. 

It's a paradox of sorts and it seems unintuitive, likely because it is. If it were intuitive, none of us would struggle with learning or executing the concept. In practice it works quite naturally, but it does require putting aside one's ego at least temporarily. It's our ego that wants us to impose our idea of sense and nonsense on the rest of the world. It's our ego that views stepping into the shoes of someone we view as insane or dumb or blind or closed-minded as an act of weakness or surrender, when it's really the only way forward. It's the means to succeed where many have failed because it puts their best interests ahead of our own. Funnily enough by doing so we end up fulfilling our self-interest anyway. 