---
layout: post
title:  "Subjective Value"
date:   2019-05-24 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

The entire reason business and fair trade exists is because value is subjective and personal. When I hire a personal trainer to help me form and execute on an exercise plan regularly, I'm essentially saying that the money I pay them is worth less to me than the service they provide back to me. On the other side, when they accept the job and begin to work with me, they're essentially saying that their time and energy spent helping me is worth less to them than the money they are receiving from me. To a third party who is witnessing this transaction with objectivity, it is extremely clear that we are both winning, despite an assymetrical trade of services and goods. However, to a third party witness who has a strong subjective opinion on the value of the money and the services exchanged, it may seem like an unfair trade. It may seem like a win-lose, mostly because they are unable or unwilling to empathize with both parties enough to understand how they subjectively value the trade. 

This simple concept gets lost in translation when we grow up and learn about the world. We are often implicitly taught that it's a dog eat dog world and that you have to look out for your own best interests. That for you to win, someone else has to lose. We aren't often taught to empathize with the other party and understand how they derive subjective value and what their priorities are. We often end up taking the default approach; projecting our own values and priorities upon them, and then negotiating with that in mind. This ends up leading to strong-arming tactics that leave a bitter taste in all participating parties' mouths and sours the relationship over time. When we aren't aware of how they derive value differently from us, we can quickly fall into the mindset that we need to get one over them to win or that we need to rely on an imbalance of information to benefit. This can sometimes lead to a guilt that we are taking advantage of the other party because clearly they don't see the value that we do. What we rarely consider is that they do see the value, just to a different standard of judgment. While *we* may never want to pay $50 to someone for this simple task of assembling a computer, and we have trouble feeling good about charging so much to our neighbour who offered to pay us to help them, we are applying our own standards to their subjective valuation of the service. We may not realize that to them, assembling a computer is a monumental task, and to us it has become trivial because we've had exposure to those aspects of life. We may also not consider that $50 to us seems like a lot of money, while to them it may be a trivial amount compared to their excitement to having their first desktop computer ready quickly and properly so they can begin learning how to use one. 

The key is to ask subjective questions to understand how the other person is evaluating the deal and what their priorities are. When approached with this form of empathy, negotiating becomes much more about finding a win-win based on assymetrical values rather than strong-arming the other party or taking advantage of their lack of knowledge. Not only are both parties more fulfilled, but the solutions also end up being much more elegant and sustainable. When we aren't aware of this way of approaching negotiation, it can be far too easy to fall into our default habits of compromise. Compromise kills relationships and it's because more often than not, both parties feel like they are giving something up to make the deal work. A real solution should make both parties feel like they are gaining value. We also end up feeling like we contributed to the world rather than taking away from it. The feeling of adding value is much more fulfilling than the feeling that you've taken advantage of someone somehow. The most bland and uncreative form of negotiation is haggling over price. Sometimes that is the only factor at play, but far more often when we explore each individual's subjective value, we realize that there are many factors they may care about that we simply haven't thought about. It may turn out that simply offering the other person some bonus advice, expertise, or even a listening ear can give them far more subjective value than the monetary amounts being haggled over. 