---
layout: post
title:  "Selective Empathy"
date:   2019-05-28 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

I've been finding the field of empathy to have more and more distinctions and layers of complexity than I ever thought possible, while still feeling like I've barely scratched the surface of everything that must be out there, both discovered and undiscovered. With some people I've found that they've viewed empathy as a natural skill, sometimes known commonly as EQ: the ability to relate to others and understand them intuitively. I've heard statements such as, "I get along great with people," and "I've always been quite good at reading people." For some people, empathy is viewed as part of their toolkit to build business relationships and get what they want. In other words, when they don't need something from someone, they have no reason to empathize. I found this perspective interesting and explored it further in discussion. What I found was that they viewed empathy as a finite resource, to be spent for the maximum benefit and withheld when the benefits are scarce. I was asked, "Isn't being selective with empathy a good thing?" and I thought about that for some time. What I came to realize was that it would be far too easy to be surrounded by people who feel neglected and used if I only make an effort to understand their subjective experiences when it benefits me, when they can give me something in return. I might end up empathizing only with those I viewed as above me while being fairly judgmental and unempathetic to those I viewed as below me. It also made me question whether empathy really was a finite resource to begin with, as that seemed to be a foundational assumption beneath the question. 

I don't really know the answers but personally I find that empathy is self-sustaining rather than draining. It makes me feel more connected to humanity as a whole and less isolated than when I'm simply trapped in my own head. I've tried to empathize equally with everyone I meet and so far it hasn't felt like a burden but rather an honour. I wonder if perhaps it's because I view the process as fulfilling itself rather than as a means to a specific end. Perhaps we need to reframe what empathy is about, since often I find it changes my mind more than it changes anyone else's, so perhaps viewing it as a tool to get what you want is a little short-sighted. I wonder how we might go about rewriting our understanding of empathy to better fulfill us in our relationships.

