---
layout: post
title:  "Humanizing"
date:   2019-06-14 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

The act of empathy is inherently humanizing. Before it comes the decision to empathize, also driven by humanization. To humanize is to recognize a being as worthy of the same respect, empathy and benefit of the doubt that we implicitly cultivate and reserve for ourselves and those closest to us. It is impossible to sustain anger, derision or superiority to another without first dehumanizing them to some degree. To humanize them is to restore our capacity to be objective in our observation. The very idea of us vs. them fuels destructive conflict while the act of humanization is to view the other as one of us in more ways rather than fewer.

Empathy and humanization need not be limited simply to human beings. We can seek to understand the motivations and functioning of any living being. The more complex their cognition, the easier it can be for us to humanize them, but we cannot use a lack of information or understanding as an excuse to exploit them. Seemingly simple beings may be more complex than we imagine and they are all worth our consideration. The recent legislation in Canada banning the captivity of whales and dolphins is a potential sign of this growing understanding borne from research and progress. The movie District 9 also frames this struggle of our cultural instinct to dehumanize and exploit vs. humanize and respect an alien species that finds itself stuck on Earth. Modern society casually refers to them as "prawns" because of their similarity in appearance, and they are socially treated as such too. It's important for us to seek to understand why our culture has made it so easy to draw lines between ourselves and others we view as different.

The act of humanization holds immense potential for fulfillment, both for the doer and the receiver. The very simple act of offering a bus seat to someone who looks tired or frustrated, not because the giver has to, but because they humanize the other person and feel for them the same way they would feel for a close friend, empowers both involved to feel connected as human beings. Everyone who witnesses this act also feels that fulfillment and connection and is much more likely to perform a humanizing act in their near future. Our capacity to humanize is one of our greatest social strengths as a species, but it's been buried in a slew of discordant messages about who we need to be to succeed and how much we need to look out for ourselves. I say this often because it's worth repeating: often the most self-serving act we can undertake is also the most selfless and giving. To humanize on a habitual, regular and unconditional basis is to embody the very essence of this philosophy. Even as a completely self-centred act, humanization pays vast dividends in both fulfillment and practical results, however we may define both. 

