---
layout: post
title:  "Chores"
date:   2019-07-04 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

What is it that turns a fulfilling activity into a chore? Writing these blog posts used to be a fulfilling outlet and a way to understand myself better; each post I wrote felt like an opportunity to explore myself and the world around me, free from pressure and expectations, standards and judgment. But at some point that changed, and it became an expectation I put on myself rather than an opportunity I enjoyed. It's been interesting to think about this and consider the different facets that separate enjoyment and obligation. 

I've been rediscovering the joy of exploring these ideas, and I've had to let go of the implicit expectations I've been placing on myself. Grammar, spelling, length of posts, frequency of posting, quality of ideas, quality of writing, depth of questioning, discomfort in thought... these were all standards I implicitly judged my writing by, and by extension myself. Of course, the worse I got at meeting them, the less I wrote, and the less I wrote, the worse I got at meeting them. I've had to go back to the root of why I started writing in the first place. I genuinely enjoyed it, and I was grateful for the opportunity to sit down and reflect on myself and the world without fences. Of course, as I explored more and more, I did begin to build fences, and those fences began to strip the enjoyment away. Exploration gave way to checking off these subconscious boxes on the list I didn't know I had created. 

In that sense I've begun to let go of my standards of good and bad writing as much as I've begun to let go of my standards of a good and bad me. Rationally I've known for quite some time that expectations would be my downfall, but emotionally that's been a difficult lesson to internalize. It was so easy to slowly crank up the judgments and begin to delineate between good and bad without even realizing it. The funny thing is it doesn't feel like this is the first time this has happened. It's been far too easy to try to stay sane and coherence in my writing when perhaps giving way to insanity and incoherence is exactly what I need for myself. It started as an outlet to understand myself and to share genuine pieces of myself with the world, but I slowly began to curate and examine those pieces as I forged them, long before they were complete. This close observation of creation hampered the very process itself, and I've come to realize that it's not the pieces that have fulfilled me so much as the process itself. By implicitly fearing the creation and sharing of blackened, charred, unacceptable-to-the-public pieces of myself, I've hurt myself in ways I didn't really understand, and perhaps still don't. It's nice to be able to put this into words because it feels like it's been weighing on me for longer than I've known.  

