---
layout: post
title:  "The Second Score"
date:   2019-04-27 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

This is an interesting concept that I came across on the Worklife podcast by Adam Grant. He explored how Bridgewater Associates, led by Ray Dalio, had a culture of honesty and openness. Criticism was welcomed and delivered often. Part of what made it easier for everyone to receive such open critique was the second score. When we're judged by someone, it's like they're giving us a score or a grade for our behaviour. When someone gives us an F in the form of criticism, we often get defensive and want to change that grade, so we argue and fight back to get them to see reason. However, at Bridgewater Associates, employees are also aware that they are being judged on how well they receive feedback and grow from it. They are being graded a second time whenever they are given feedback by their peers, and they learn to shoot for a high second score rather than changing their first score. This has led to employees genuinely enjoying receiving harsh critical feedback because they feel like they're growing from it and being judged positively for how well they receive the feedback and apply it. Most of us feel bad when we get an F from someone, even for something as small as how we organize files. We end up taking it personally and feel a detraction from our self-worth. At Bridgewater Associates, they've managed to build a culture where the default reaction is the exact opposite. People feel good about receiving F's because they've learnt to think about the A they can earn for receiving the F well and learning from it. It's certainly a lesson we can learn to implement in our daily lives when we ask for feedback. 

Often when we ask for feedback, we do it in ways that implicitly protect us from rejection. We ask leading questions or word things in a way that implies we'd like to receive praise rather than honesty. We personalize our questions and give the impression that we'd take a response personally as a judgment of our self, rather than focusing on our behaviour and making it clear that we can hear harsh feedback because it's about our behaviour rather than our self-worth. A poor way to ask for feedback: *What could I have done better?* On the surface, this seems fine, and many of us are taught to ask for feedback this way. The issue is it's a relatively empty question that encourages an empty response. People will have to go outside of their comfort zone to give us an honest answer since they aren't sure how we'll take it. Based on the question, we could very well take an answer personally. A better way to ask the question that would garner more honest responses would be, *What might you have done differently?* By wording it this way, we're implicitly asking them to imagine themselves in our shoes and walk us through their approach. What's great about this approach is that it works towards building mutual understanding and encourages them to point out both ways we could have done better, but also ways we might have just done it differently without necessarily doing it better or worse. Sometimes a different approach or way of thinking about a task is worth being exposed to, and this question gives the answerer freedom to give you that insight. If asked with a genuine sense of curiosity, a question worded this way also minimizes the pressure on the receiver to feel like they are giving critical feedback, and often they will feel more like they're just sharing their perspective. In many ways, that's the ideal state for feedback to be exchanged; as shared perspective. If we can learn to receive harsh critical feedback as simply shared perspective, we will benefit much more from feedback that many others spurn instinctively based on poor delivery. At the end of the day we are responsible for how well we can learn from the information the outside world throws at us.