---
layout: post
title:  "The Overwhelming Influence of Community"
date:   2019-05-03 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Our choices aren't as independent as they might seem. We often think of health as a state of being dependant on a mostly even mix of circumstances and personal choices. What we don't consider is that personal choices are heavily influenced by circumstances, so much so that to ask someone to change their choices without even taking a look at their circumstances is simply unproductive. It's part of why when the VitalSmarts team studied people who managed to break old or form new long-term habits successfully, they found that an overwhelming majority of commitment keepers relied not on willpower, but on changing their circumstances and surrounding influences. 

Dr. Sandro Galea had a Q & A on Reddit yesterday, which can be found [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/bk9tob/im_sandro_galea_physician_epidemiologist_author/ "Dr. Sandro Galea Q&A"). He talks about how our society's understanding of health revolves around the lifestyles we adopt to stay healthy, and our reliance on medical care when we aren't healthy. Reality is a bit more nuanced than that as health revolves around more around our immediate circumstances and community more than who our doctor happens to be. This is because our communities influence our choices on a regular basis, while our doctor has to work to influence us after all of the daily influences make their impact on our decisions. If we can work to build communities that influence us positively, then this is a great thing for people and for doctors. 

Unfortunately right now most communities and circumstances influence us negatively, and doctors are forced to spend their scarce amount of time with patients trying to undo this influence as best they can through words and direct treatment. It's an uphill battle and it's no wonder they're losing. This isn't just how our physical health and wellbeing function. Our cultural and social choices also work along a similar principle, meaning that the interpersonal decisions we make and the habits we rely on to build and strengthen our relationship are heavily influenced by our upbringing and our communities. When we rely on a mentor, life coach or mental health professional to help us, they are forced to chip away at those influences to help us build new, better habits. The way we think about success and both mental and physical well-being right now doesn't lend itself well to addressing the root cause of the concern. We're stuck chasing treatments rather than building solid foundations of health and positive interpersonal habits. 

In addition to offering people resources to unlearn old habits and form new ones as we're currently doing, we also need to reform the implicit ideas that run through our communities. These are the insidious biases that have crept so deep into society that we barely question them anymore, teaching them to our children without a second thought and enforcing them on each other even when they feel off or we feel misguided. We simply haven't been shown any alternatives. We respond with anger and defensiveness because the only alternative we've seen is being a pushover. If we've never had the opportunity to observe someone diffuse a situation with the third option, we'll never know it exists, and neither will our children. 

When it comes to physical health, the same problems abound. There are entire communities where the social norm has replaced water as the default drink with Coca-Cola. This is in part due to tap water in these communities being unsafe to drink, and bottled water being more expensive than sugary carbonated drinks because those companies often exploit third-world communities' water sources while paying them next to nothing for their resources. Combine this with the addictive effect of carbonated sugar-laden pop and it becomes obvious why reality is the way it is. Can we really blame the individuals for their personal choices in this matter when it's so clear to us why the choice they make has been made the easiest, most convenient choice? We follow the path of least resistance, and raised in their circumstances, we would make the same choice. The solution then is to make it easier to access water, easier to access healthy food, and easier to access and enjoy exercise. It's part of why parks are so important to urban design, as they make connecting with nature that much more convenient, making it that much more likely to take place. 

If it's so easy for a community to default to Coca-Cola, imagine how easy it could be for entire societies to become reliant on broken habits of solving interpersonal conflict if they are simply easy to default to when our egos are hurt. We fall into cycles of anger and guilt without ever considering the bigger picture or what we really want the relationship to look like. Coaching my friend through his challenges has shown me how so many of the questions and approaches I've defaulted to as obvious were completely new to him. It's not because he's stupid; on the contrary, he's more capable of the kind of reasoning this emotional mastery so naturally lends itself to than I naturally was when I first started, but nobody has ever made him feel like it's okay to even consider the possibility of responding to aggression with understanding. Entire sets of options are just completely cut off from him because of how he's been raised to feel. He's not alone in this, but we barely talk about just how difficult it is for so many people to apply their creative intellect to solving these emotional problems the same way they can so easily apply them to financial or physical problems. Those fortunate enough to have grown up with the emotional space to consider other options have a certain responsibility to share that understanding with others and make them feel capable of considering the previously impossible or untenable. It's the first step we have to take as a society to grow both sides of our wellbeing and health.

As Dr. Sandro Galea said, *The WHO defines health as "a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity." On the whole, our culture is inclined to miss the first part of this definition, in its focus on simply curing disease and calling it health. This is seen in our preoccupation with extending life indefinitely. But since we cannot live forever, we must ask ourselves: what is health for? I would argue health is a means to an end, and that end is being able to enjoy a rich, full life, doing what we enjoy in the presence of those we care about. Our definition of health should take this into account.*