---
layout: post
title:  "Four Levels of Reaction"
date:   2019-04-24 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

I've been helping a friend with some tough relationship problems he's facing, although lately I've been realizing that he's been helping me just as much. Each time I share my perspective with him and help him wrestle with a challenging emotional challenge, I end up gaining immense clarity on the issues we discuss and the way I think about them. One such discussion we just had led to us discussing the below model of reaction. It ended up helping us both better understand ourselves and how we view the world.

When faced with a verbal attack or direct conflict of some sort, people react in a few different ways. My friend and I separated these into four rough layers or levels, like a pyramid. He's been reading *Crucial Conversations* so we pulled on some of the concepts from the book to delineate the two lower levels, *silence* and *violence*. Silence is one of the two main forms of defensiveness from *Crucial Conversations* and involves shutting down, going quiet, sometimes being passive aggressive, sarcastic or throwing under-handed verbal jabs back at the other person. Violence is the other, and often presents itself in the form of a raised voice, interrupting the other person, threatening or expansive hand and body movements and furious facial expressions of rage or disdain. These are our two default, animal forms of defensiveness that stem from our lizard brain days of reacting to danger by jumping to fight, flight or freeze reactions. 

The third level of this pyramid we labelled *assertiveness* as a form of tempered, calm response to put the other person in their place and rightfully set clear boundaries. Some aspects of this layer include a sense of reacting to injustice with justice or correcting an unfair action. Principles and honor fuel the response and shape its intention. While assertiveness is often healthier than silence and violence, it carries some of the fatal flaws of its lower level reactions. Namely, ego and judgment. Ego is what creates the sense of moral outrage and injustice, the idea of feeling trampled on or attacked and needing to respond by setting boundaries or perhaps teaching the other person a lesson or giving them a taste of their own medicine. This ego leads to judgment, which labels the other person as bad, stupid, misguided, mean or any other number of adjectives we use to rationalize our response. We are often taught to be assertive and rightfully so, considering society and our teachers were often only regularly exposed to silence and violence as lesser alternatives. From a perspective where only these three options exist, assertiveness certainly looks like the healthiest and most balanced mindset to cultivate. But since it stems from ego and is fuelled by judgment, it only serves to hinder the growth of its user. It feels good in the moment to put someone in their place and to feel like we taught them the *right* way to do things or to be. That we showed the bully how wrong they were and that they regretted their wrongdoings. This sense of justice is a very ego-based form of pleasure and while it might feel good, it doesn't really help anybody grow, learn or improve their mindset in the long-term. The key failing of assertiveness is that it very often stems from selfishness, which is ego. When we are assertiveness, we are often thinking only of what we need and how to benefit ourselves in the short-term. The irony is that our response does not truly benefit us in the long-term the same way the fourth level of reaction does:

*Understanding.* A reaction free of ego and free of judgment, stemming from a very simple but genuine concern for the well-being of the other person. I genuinely believe that when we do what's best for the person attacking us, what is truly in their best interests, we also do what's truly best for ourselves in the long-term. When we are blinded by the short-term benefits of responding with assertiveness, we lose sight of limitless potential benefit to both parties if we were to ask ourselves, *What are they going through right now? How can I help them?*. Often when we respond to anger with peace and understanding, curiosity, empathy and an open ear, both parties grow as human beings from the encounter. This may seem like an impractical response for the everyday person, but in reality it is the most practical response of which we are capable. I will admit however that it can be difficult for us to see that when we are blinded by our ego and sense of self-judgment. When someone insults us and we feel attacked personally, it is because we tie our value as human beings to our failures and successes; our behaviour. We judge ourselves harshly by their harsh words and feel personally attacked. However, if we separate our behaviour and actions from our sense of self-worth, we are capable of equally receiving both insults and compliments without feeling unduly elated or dejected. The reality is nobody attacks another with the genuine intent to hurt them; that intention that so strongly comes across is always the upper layer to a deeper, more genuine intention that is worth seeking to understand. To explain my perspective on this to my friend, I shared with him the encounter I wrote about back in November here: [A Formative Story](http://culturepen.com/blog/post/2018/11/10/A-Formative-Story.html "A Formative Story")

My discussion with my friend gave me some insights into what really took place that night. At the time I had simply been practicing something I had read about recently from *Crucial Conversations* and it wasn't so much that I had no ego or that I was looking out for her best interests. The reality is I simply put into practice what I had read by reacting with calmness and a willingness to listen and understand. I took nothing she said personally and I simply did my best to empathize with her. Experiencing it again in my memory while telling the story to my friend made me realize that her apparent intention and her genuine intention were quite clearly separate to me now. Her attack on me was about how I broke the rules and was using the pool clubhouse past closing hours. However, the personal nature of her anger and verbal attacks were clues that pointed to her genuine intention. I didn't realize it at the time, but she even alluded to it in the words she used when her attitude shifted from angry to calm and almost thoughtful. *You're quite a respectful young man,* she had said. Looking back, I now realize that the crux of the matter for her was the sense of disrespect she had felt at first. When she came to close up and saw that I was using the pool past closing hours and that I hadn't followed the rules of keeping all the lights on, she immediately felt disrespected and insulted. *How dare he make light of the rules in such a brazen manner! I'll teach him a lesson*. She had jumped to the conclusion that I knowingly and maliciously disrespected her and the establishment by breaking the rules. But after she had berated and attacked me, when faced with my empathetic admittance of wrongdoing and understanding, she realized that I had had no intention of breaking any rules. Her attitude turned around completely and she took back everything she said because her genuine concern had been alleviated. I wasn't out to disrespect her or the rules. Although I had still clearly broken the rules, which her apparent, surface level intention was initially about, she didn't mind at all. The reality is once her genuine intention was addressed, her apparent, surface level intention didn't matter to her. The truth is it had *never* mattered to her. Even if she didn't know it at the time, just as I hadn't realized it then either, her surface level intention was merely covering up her genuine intention and strong feeling of being disrespected. As long as she knew that I had good intentions all along and did indeed respect her and the rules, she was happy to repeal her harsh words and even offer to let me use the pool without being accompanied by my landlord.

It sounds like a ridiculous, perhaps lucky experience that shouldn't be taken as an example of anything, but I view it differently. Since that day I've been approaching situations this way and the results have been very consistent. When someone attacks me and I respond with understanding and a concern for their well-being and long-term fulfillment, I end up much happier afterwards than if I had responded with a sense of wounded pride and tried to correct their misconception or put them in their place. It simply works, and as crazy as it sounds to say this in today's world, I simply see no reason to ever react assertively anymore when I can choose to react with understanding instead!