---
layout: post
title:  "What The Ego Wants"
date:   2019-05-01 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Our ego often wants to project its sense of fairness and justice on the rest of the world as if that's reality. It's so convinced that its subjective sense of morality is true that it feels a righteous indignation when the world refuses to bend to its will. This is part of what my friend L is going through and being forced to face. He's had to question his sureness of himself and is beginning to realize that other people have their own entirely subjective, but equally meaningful perceptions of fairness. The other realization we had in a recent discussion was that was his ego wants for himself is not really what his rational self would want for him. In this case his ego feels slighted and is completely focused on explaining to his friends how they misunderstood the situation and having them understand and agree with him. He believes that if they knew all the facts of the story, as he does, that they would understand why he acted the way he did. I asked him how he would respond if they listened to all the facts and still didn't agree with him. He responded that he wouldn't be able to accept that and would believe they still didn't fully understand him. He's starting to see how his view is unhealthy because when I asked him if he'd be able to empathize with himself if he were in their shoes, he said it would be nearly impossible for him. He's realizing that what his ego feels he deserves is actually asking the impossible of them, by his own measurement. 

That's where I pointed out that even if his ego got exactly what it wanted and his friends heard him out, agreed with him, and forgave him with their full support, that would be bad for him. Sure, it would be great for his ego, and he'd feel like all was right and fair with the world. It would feel like a great injustice had been corrected and he could move forward now, but I proposed that this would actually serve as a setback for him. Right now the only thing motivating him is this very unfairness. He hasn't actually learnt to behave any differently or handle his emotions in the moment differently, so if his friends forgave him for his mistakes, it's very likely he would go on to make the same mistakes again and slide right back down the same hill. In a way the situation he's in is exactly where he needs to be to have the motivation to take a long, hard look at himself and do the hard work of improving how he functions. He agreed with this, but said he still felt like he couldn't stand by and let an unfairness exist when it could be fixed, even if rationally he sees how fixing the unfairness before fixing himself would only cause him harm. 

Somehow we'll have to work through this and find a way to show him that his feeling of unfairness is stemming from his ego, not his rational self, and that if he can internalize that, he can grow from the situation rather than rush to impose his ego's will on his friends' perceptions of him. 
