---
layout: post
title:  "Ego Death"
date:   2019-05-10 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Sometimes the very thing our ego fears most is exactly what we need to go through to move forward. Because our ego is our identity of ourselves and our individuality, impending harm to the ego will feel like impending harm to ourselves. It's natural to fear that, but at a certain point it's the next step to growing as a human being. If a human being's purpose is to increase its capacity to love over its lifetime, then chipping away at its ego is a vital task. Accepting an injustice, admitting a fault, or refraining from judging a "bad" person all feel to the ego like being on fire. We often respond by dousing it in water, affirming that we are right and reassuring ourselves that our judgments are reality. Natural forest fires are a key part of how trees reproduce, yet trees may have a hard time choosing to succumb to a fire if they had egos. We face the same dilemma, but the fire is one we can deny for a lifetime.

 Choosing not to experience it only hinders our growth, but it rarely feels that way. The feelings of superiority and progress that accompany feeding the ego are certainly pleasurable. If they were truly fulfilling, perhaps there would be no problem with keeping our egos. But the pleasure always comes at a cost. Our relationships suffer, our perception suffers, and our ability to adapt and grow outside of ourselves suffers. The pleasure is eventually drowned out by the void. Unfortunately, we've always been notoriously terrible long-term thinkers, so a decision that feels awful in the short-term is difficult to grapple with. It's made even more difficult by the fact that the benefits are only made easier to notice as our ego is chipped away; if we're after status and judgment, the benefits of egolessness may even look like a punishment. Who would want to be chained by empathy when they can live a life free of it? Our egos blind us to the clear link between our judgments and the strife and conflict in our relationships. Our egos force us to look outward rather than inward, to demand to be understood rather than to seek to understand, and so we're stuck blaming the world for problems that are inherently of the ego. Light the match and let it go. It's only the first step, but it's the step that takes us right out of our own way. Every subsequent step is much easier when we begin to recognize the tempting whisper of our ego for what it is; just one perspective rather than our entire identity. 