---
layout: post
title:  "Certainly Above Average"
date:   2019-05-15 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

What is it that makes 90% of drivers certain that they are above average? Our tendency to believe we are above average is a well known bias, but I'm curious how it interacts with certain other fallacies we have, such as our belief that we are good predictors of ourselves and our future feelings. Often our present feelings influence our prediction of how we will feel or react in the future. Take the example of winning the lottery. Ask anyone you know what they would do if they won the jackpot in a lottery, and you're sure to hear many answers geared towards financial responsibility. *"I would put it in a savings account and live off the interest,"* or *"I would keep my job but buy a house and a new car."* If you asked them what the chances are that they would spend all the money within five years, almost anyone would answer with certainty that that wouldn't happen. One Florida study done on lottery winners found that 70% of them had spent all of their winnings within five years. It also turned out that the size of their jackpot didn't change this likelihood. 67% of Americans say they would keep their job even if they won $10 million, while about 52% of actual lottery winners kept working in some way. 

The way we're wired makes it difficult for us to view ourselves objectively even after we're presented with stats. It's hard to try to envision what could lead us to choices in the future that seem very obviously flawed in the present. One aspect to realize is that rationality in the present makes us implicitly believe we will be rational in the future. What we fail to see is that being rational now doesn't stop us from being emotional when the situation shifts, so it's important to try to account for extremes in emotions and synthesize a realistic response. Unfortunately, this is something that's nearly impossible to do accurately, so a great fallback if this is impossible is to choose uncertainty instead. The least we can do is choose to be uncertain about our future behaviour and responses, understanding that we are human and subject to forces and circumstances that could influence us in ways we cannot predict. Winning the lottery is just one of these forces that imbues us with all sorts of emotions and ideas. A few to consider might be the idea that money is now infinitely available or not a resource to manage anymore, or a blindness to tracking incomes and expenses. Can you imagine how difficult it must be to choose to budget your income and expenses *after* you win ten million dollars? If it seems easy, then that's a good sign you aren't predicting how you will feel accurately, and to choose to be uncertain at the very least.

It's also important to detach the way we measure growth and value ourselves. As long as we are trying to be above average or superior to those around us, we are constantly incentivized to emphasize reasons that's true and bury reasons that's false. Our reasoning becomes motivated to put us in the best light and we become incapable of perceiving reality. If instead we can learn to feel valuable and worthy even if we're objectively under average in some skill, then we can take it upon ourselves to learn and grow. We can take pride in our willingness to accept reality as it is and then change it without judging ourselves for it. 