---
layout: post
title:  "Out of Touch with Society"
date:   2019-05-20 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

In conversation with one of my clients I asked them a question. It surprised him, and he realized he had never thought about it. However, as we got further into it, I could sense a discomfort around the subject. I realized this was strange territory for him even though it made perfect sense to me, so I slowed my pace and tried to see it from his perspective. The specific topic doesn't matter, but what was interesting was when he told me that I was out of touch with society. That the reason he had never considered this was because it would simply not be acceptable in society. Nobody else would consider it. And yet he agreed that it made some sense when I explained it. I became curious and asked a few more questions before I pointed out a possibility. Perhaps this was weird to society, perhaps it wasn't. What was important was that it discomforted *him* personally, and as long as he believes he fits well into society, then they must find it weird as well. So clearly, I must be out of touch with society. I admitted this, but asked then: if my idea was out of touch, but made sense to him, couldn't it mean that society was actually the side that was out of touch? If it was actually a good idea and he had never considered it before, did he really want to choose not to consider it now because it didn't fit society's standard of acceptable approaches?

This made it clear to him that it wasn't about society but rather his own standards. We all want to judge things from our own perspective but also have the backing of a greater body of authority, such as society. It's important to recognize this motivation because it can prevent us from learning great perspectives that only open up to us when we question why they seem unacceptable to us. Sometimes it's not society that binds us, but our own egos that bind us on behalf of society. We use society as the excuse to stay within the box we've built ourselves. We do this with individual judgments too. Far too often we judge ourselves on behalf of others, even if they aren't thinking about us at all. Then when we meet them, we try to draw meaning from their words to fulfill the judgments to which we've all but sentenced ourselves. Even if we try to ask them what they think, we frame it in such a painfully leading question that it's obvious to them what we want to hear, even when we're then completely hurt by the response we implicitly asked them give us. Nobody judges us nearly as much as we judge ourselves, and when we learn to stop judging ourselves, we also begin to stop judging others. At the end of the day, the vast majority of judgments we apply to others are judgments that are fuelled by our own perceptions of ourselves.