---
layout: post
title:  "Thoughts and Emotions"
date:   2019-07-03 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

I had an interesting discussion with a friend earlier today. He posited the idea that all emotion may stem from thought, whether it's conscious or unconscious. Emotion has to be triggered by a perception, and perception requires judgment and analysis to be categorized by us. We see a bear walking down the street in our city, we know that bears are wild, dangerous animals that aren't normally in cities, and so we feel surprise, fear, concern etc. If of course, we happened to live in a reality where bears have been domesticated over generations of breeding and are now common housepets as well as part of a growing population of stray animals that are quite friendly and docile. In other words, if they were like dogs to us today, our emotional response to seeing a bear in the city would be very different. We may feel curious for a moment and we may stop to pet the bear and interact with it, finding it cute and playful, or we may simply pass it by nonchalantly on our way to wherever we're headed without much of a second thought. 

If thought is the basis of all emotion, then the experiences we have over time shape our subconscious beliefs, which lead to the varying thoughts we have in response to familiar and unfamiliar situations. These thoughts in turn ascribe various levels of meaning to situations and enable us to react in familiar emotional ways. It makes sense that someone insensitively cutting me off in traffic would cause me anger or annoyance rather than joy or pleasure. After all, we know that it's very likely they are either doing it to spite us or they simply don't care about us or are only thinking about themselves. It seems very unlikely to us that anyone would cut us off in traffic while having good intentions for us. By extension, it would be strange to ever be happy about it, even unrealistic or unreasonable in a sense.

This is what I'm curious about. What is it that makes our different emotional responses to situations feel so fitting to us? When someone gives us a present we like on an occasion we find suitable for present-receiving, such as our birthday or Christmas, we are happy and grateful. When someone gives us a present we dislike, we may be grateful for their thought and intent, but also feel a little disappointed by their lack of understanding of us and the fact that we're now stuck with something we don't really want. If someone reacted with anger or sadness to a present, we would find that strange. We might find it natural to believe that there must be some particular reason for their odd response; maybe they don't like the present, or maybe they dislike receiving presents in general, or perhaps they're just in a bad mood because of something else they're going through. On the flip-side, if someone reacts with joy or pleasure to a situation we find utterly distasteful, such as being cut off in traffic, we would find that insane. We may consider possible reasons for their behaviour;perhaps they're just trying to put on a cheerful face for us and themselves, or they're just in a good mood because of something else they're going through, or they've somehow learnt to like being cut off in traffic, which seems very odd to consider to us. When people respond emotionally to situations in ways we find unintuitive, we look for the meaning and cause and reasoning behind their response. After all, it seems unnatural to us until we can figure out which pieces of the puzzle we're missing. When we respond emotionally to situations, it feels completely intuitive. It feels obvious, especially in the moment, why our response makes perfect sense and is so natural. Even looking back, if we find the memory of our response somewhat strange, we try to understand the meaning behind it but it feels difficult to do so. This difficulty exists in part because trying to question and understand what felt obvious at one point is automatically unintuitive to us. We are constantly being tugged away from objective questioning by our subjective beliefs and thoughts that tell us how it made so much sense. In fact, if the world as a whole justifies our emotional response and we feel like any normal person would have responded the way we do, we never even try to understand or question it to begin with. It seems pointless to question why that person who cut you off in traffic made you feel annoyed at the time. Of course you felt that way, it's only natural. It's only when we're faced with conflicting opinions that we seek to understand or make sense of ourselves. It's only when the rest of the world seems to think or feel differently on the matter do we begin to consider the why behind our response. What did it mean to us? Why did we react differently from the way others do? 

I've been starting to question some of these reactions of mine that I've been taking for granted my entire life. Sure, everybody "normal" reacts this way, but why do we react this way? How and why have we collectively decided that these situations hold specific meanings that then naturally lead to particular, very natural responses that are human. The basis of emotion may be very biological and human, but the way in which we derive meaning from the world around us is very cultural, subconscious, and perhaps even understandable. It may not be something that simply happens because there's no other way for it to happen. Instead, it may give us insights into the collective hallucination we've signed up for as a modern human being, and the foundational assumptions we've very implicitly agreed to live out together. This may all be mouldable, and it may explain much of how we suffer and feel fulfilled alike, but first we'll have to question and seek to understand it without judgment. 