---
layout: post
title:  "How Vs. What"
date:   2019-04-13 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

We've been taught to focus so heavily on what we want to do, what we want to be, want we want to accomplish, and what we want to have that we rarely stop to consider our standards for *how* we want to approach every single *what*. Lately I've been much less enamored by all the *whats* of my actions and much more interested in the *hows* behind them. I look at the values at the forefront of any action I undertake and ask myself if that is how I want to live. Work I do is much more fulfilling and inspired when the values I care about dictate my approach rather than the results I'm striving towards. In fact, when I put values first, the results are often exactly what I need them to be rather than what I would want them to be if I set a desire the conventional way. This means I get to progress in ways that I can't predict but are perfectly fitting. 

By caring about my methods and my intentions, my actions end up being much more in alignment with who I am than any regular form of goal-setting could possibly enable. I end up approaching situations with much more compassion and empathy rather than being focused on what I want to get out of them. I also end up being more open to unconventional forms of fulfillment, enabling me to take risks and experiment in ways I've never considered viable. The implicit focus on *what* that we're raised with only serves as a barrier that slows our progress and growth. It also blinds us to the needs of others and sometimes even to our own real needs, masking them with the more superficial desires and goals we've been taught to pursue. The first step is unlearning these lessons and rebuilding our way of thought. 