---
layout: post
title:  "Not Taking Yes For An Answer"
date:   2019-06-19 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Hearing a yes can be so comforting. It can mean acceptance, validation, progress, acknowledgement and respect. But sometimes we need to consider not taking yes for an answer; not just from other people, but from ourselves too. Far too often we accept a yes and the ensuing comfort and cease to question and wonder. Sometimes getting a yes back to our question is the worse outcome for us. Getting what we want isn't always good for us. It's odd to figure out how we can feel sometimes when this is the case—when we're chasing a yes we can feel we don't really want to accept because something meaningful may lie on the other side of a different answer. Our culture makes us feel guilty for not taking a yes, for being curious beyond what we want, and for questioning the "good" things in life. 

The funny thing is that so many of the yeses we get from ourselves or others aren't enthsuiastic, passionate agreements and acknowledgements; they are often just the default path of least resistance, the path of least conflict, and the path of least discomfort. When we can make ourselves feel safe to seek no, to seek to be wrong, to seek to be disagreed with and to learn from refusal and rejection, a fascinating path opens up instead. The yeses you do receive will be meaningful, passionate, whole-hearted, because people will feel completely safe to say no when they aren't sure. In that space of being given the freedom to say no, yes holds far more value and meaning and has a much deeper impact. A shallow, path-of-least-resistance yes may only serve to hinder us in the long-term. It panders to what we want and denies us what we need. It may take us years after a shallow yes for us to look back and see how little it means to us now, and how much more we would have appreciated an honest no. But that choice is one we get to make every moment in the expectations we set and the culture we create in every interaction we undertake. It's a choice to seek out genuine human connection in all its forms, not just the ones that lead to a yes. It's a choice to enjoy every no because we can feel its value in our core.  