---
layout: post
title:  Renewal
date:   2019-08-25 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

I went back and read the very first page of my blog posts from [June 2018](http://culturepen.com/page22/ "Culture Pen Page 22"). The simplicity and purity of the ideas presented spoke aptly of my current struggles and inspired me to begin writing anew. I'm very much in the situation of needing to take my past self's advice, advice I had deeply buried or forgotten altogether. Looking back, I feel like I know more today, but I may not know *better*. This distinction is key. With my beliefs consistently shifting radically, I've become accustomed to perpetual questioning and change, but now I'm trapped by the fear of never belonging. The fear not of simply being too different in some static way, but of seeming to dynamically change beliefs and aspects of my behaviour that seem to represent the essence of my being to such a degree and so constantly that it feels erratic, unstable and simply not acceptable to most people around me, such that I may never fit in anywhere for long. 

And yet the deep, meaningful relationships in my life seem to prove this fear wrong at every turn. I find unconditional acceptance and love and growth whenever I'm willing to look for it. My fear of its absence prevents me from searching in the first place, despite the overwhelming evidence of its existence. This capacity to keep searching despite fear is one of the greatest gifts my past self cultivated for himself and, quite inadvertently, for me; I buried it somewhere along the way without ever realizing I had. It's time to dig it back out and embody it once more. 

It also makes me ask: What gift am I cultivating for myself today and, perhaps quite inadvertently, for my future self? 
