---
layout: post
title:  "Progressions of Empathy"
date:   2019-05-09 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

It struck me lately that the way I empathize has changed over time. The empathy I was taught involved such adages as walking a mile in someone else's shoes or the golden rule, treating others the way I would want to be treated. This was the only kind of empathy I thought existed, but I've realized that's not true. This kind of empathy is based entirely on how we feel about certain circumstances. We synthesize it by imagining ourselves in the circumstances of others, then judge whether their reaction is appropriate or not. There are two major flaws with this. The first is that human beings are notoriously terrible at affective forecasting, which is predicting how we will feel in an imagined situation. Time and time again in study after study we've found that the way we feel in situations is very different from the way we think we will feel in them. It's part of why we're so bad at making choices that fulfill us, even if the options are open to us. Part of the reason is because our brains are heavily affected by our present state of mind when we envision a future set of circumstances. So if I'm in a good mood and I'm trying to imagine how I'd feel in the painful, stressful situation that someone else is going through, I'll end up underestimating how bad they must feel. The inverse is true as well, where if I'm dejected, it's very hard for me to empathize with someone who's in a great mood. The same brainwork at play here is why we end up buying too many groceries for the week when we go shopping on an empty stomach, or too few when we go shopping right after eating; our predictive capabilities are heavily influenced by our present feelings. 

The second major flaw is that our experiences and standards are simply different. Men trying to imagine being pregnant and always choosing to birth the baby, then pushing that as law on women stating that they would gladly do the same if they were pregnant is a potential example of this. Imagining the pressures of a scenario you will never experience is intrinsically less stressful than imagining the pressures of a scenario that is impending. It's the same as me trying to synthesize the existential dread someone on death row might be feeling, or even the sense of peace and acceptance they might be feeling, when I'm under no pressure of being executed anytime soon. It's just not doable, but we often implicitly believe that we're capable of this kind of objective empathy. Every experience we've ever had has always been centred around us. Things happen to us, for us, against us, beside us, behind us, or ahead of us. This kind of intrinsic self-centredness we all possess is often overlooked when we consider our objectivity, but it's a layer that always exists atop all of our opinions and beliefs. I've come to believe that one of the keys to a deep, meaningful empathy that isn't trying to make certain ideas win and others lose is an open doubtfulness. 

The more open we are to our synthesized empathy being wrong, the more likely we are to gather information right from the source. Too often we avoid asking the awkward questions about how someone is feeling and how their circumstances are interacting with their outlook and mood. Yet these questions are the closest we can get to perceiving reality from someone else's actual shoes, rather than just our synthesized imagination of walking a mile in their shoes. When we do synthesize empathy, it's important to consider potential holes or areas where our own impressions are blurring the line between their experience and ours. At the end of the day, empathy is about getting as close as we can to experiencing what someone else is going through, emotions and all. This means sometimes we have to emphasize something more than we're used to to synthesize what it represents to them. Someone who raises a dog from puppyhood all the way into adulthood and considers it their child is going to feel the same emotional loss if it dies in a sudden accident that I might feel if I were to lose a child the same way. And yet we're often implicitly taught to impose our own moral and subjective judgments of value on situations like this. Our natural instinct is to mourn with them with true empathy, and yet our ego might belittle their loss, especially if we've never grown close to an animal before. We might impose our own perspective on them and ask, "Why can't they just get another dog?" This example might make it obvious to you, but we do this all the time in lesser circumstances when we simply don't ask the right questions or apply the appropriate emphasis. Someone whose childhood blanket is stolen from them might get the most cursory sympathy from us, and yet the sense of loss they are experiencing might be the equivalent sense of loss and despair we would feel if our car was stolen. It's not about monetary value or whatever metrics our egos might apply to rationalize our perspective, but rather the actual emotions they feel that are completely subjective to their experiences and attachments. 

Empathy is about looking beyond our initial ego-based reaction and seeking to understand exactly how they feel without judging those feelings as underreactions or overreactions based on our experiences. It's about noticing when our ego is getting in the way of meaningfully connecting with another person in one of the few ways that is truly and uniquely human.

