---
layout: post
title:  "Easier"
date:   2019-04-28 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Everything we do gets easier with time, but this comfort comes with its own set of drawbacks. We mistake easyness for skill, when sometimes we've mastered doing something ineffeciently. When we try to learn it a better way, we struggle and sometimes give up because it doesn't feel right. True masters realize that they need to raise the difficulty of a skill at the same rate that it becomes easier, which is where the constant push for growth and discomfort come together. Sometimes this even means going back and unlearning unconscious habits to learn them better the second time around. It's also worth learning to differentiate between measuring our results based on comfort and ease of use vs. actual impact and efficiency. Sure, I could laugh at my friend who seems to be struggling to do pushups while I do twice as many with ease, but I'm likely doing them with worse form and am just blinded to that possibility by my ego. This is why it's important to learn from people with proven results rather than relying on our own judgment to measure results. Our brains have evolved to be very effective PR departments with a vested interest in keeping us happy, comfortable and optimistic, rather than being honest or objective about our performance. 

The opposite also applies. The harder something is, the less we think we're improving. We mistake ease for skill and give up when we don't feel we're improving enough. If we learn to separate our sense of improvement from our ease of application, we can feel like we're growing while understanding that the difficulty might remain the same or get worse because we're pushing ourselves and keeping the challenge meaningful.