---
layout: post
title:  "Rogerian Conflict"
date:   2019-04-25 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

All my life I've taken for granted that arguments and other forms of verbal conflict require a winner and a loser. Nobody had ever taught me that there are two formally defined types of arguments: Aristatolian and Rogerian. Aristatolian arguments are the ones we encounter frequently and to most of us, they're the only kind of arguments that exist. They focus on proving a point, and more importantly, proving a side of the argument, represented by one of the arguers. With that kind of argument being taught as the default, no wonder our egos and self-worths get involved as we lean into an argument, pushing to rationalize our side and be crowned the victor. It makes us feel good, so of course our reasoning will be motivated towards our side. The reality is that as long as we want one side of an argument to be right more than another, we've already lost. Our learning is heavily impeded and so is our ability to reason objectively. As long as we implicitly seek the pleasure of being right and avoid the shame and displeasure of being wrong, we will never truly perceive realty unless it lines up with our beliefs.

The up side is that when we learn to build common understanding rather than trying to prove a point, we begin to spot opportunities for growth and learning where previously we would only feel shame and fear. This serves to deepen the relationships we hold with others and improve the quality of all the interactions we participate in. So much of the interpersonal strife in our lives comes from our own flawed approach to conflict and differences with each other. There's just too much to gain from Rogerian conflict that not learning to facilitate it would be a large mistake of ommission. 

The best part is that I've found it to be quite contagious. When I stop arguing to win and begin arguing to understand and expand our collective pool of knowledge, I notice that the other person unconsciously begins to approach our discussion the same way. Sometimes the fear that stops us is founded on the idea that we will be stepped on or taken advantage of if we show any sign of vulnerability or a willingness to change our mind. Reality couldn't be further from the truth though; vulnerability is exactly what drives our opponents to become our allies. As long as we treat our partner in conflict like an enemy, they will fulfil that role. Once we begin to treat them as an ally, they begin to fulfil that role and we become their ally rather than their opponent. 
