---
layout: post
title:  "Memory and Imagination"
date:   2019-05-27 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Uniquely capable of both vivid remembrance and imagination, we are uniquely subject to the suffering that accompanies these two capabilities as well. This suffering is only compounded by our very genuine belief that our remembered and predicted versions of ourselves are truly accurate and representative of reality. When stuck between what we had and what we could have, it's no wonder so many of us are dissatisfied with what we have. As we begin to acquire what we could have, we begin to create new desires to fuel our dissatisfaction, and a parallel sense of anxiety develops at the thought of losing what we've worked so hard to accumulate so far. Our life is more than the sum total of what we've achieved, acquired and experienced that we often reduce it to. It's less about the legacy we leave behind and more about this very unique moment in which we find ourselves. The drive to grow and become better and form meaningful relationships and succeed at our careers and buy cool things can be very pleasing sometimes, but the degree to which we allow it to inflate us is the very same degree to which we can be deflated by material loss and failures and setbacks. Perhaps there's a way to get the upside without the downside, but it may involve changing the way we judge and measure progress. As long as we treat it as just one perspective in our heads, one voice that only gets some of all of our thought time, a partner to the other voices in our heads, its capability to cause us to judge and suffer is heavily diminished. Perhaps the momentary pleasure is also diminished, but we may be able to keep the fulfilling aspect of the drive while diminishing the momentary suffering. 

Beyond that drive though, fulfillment is not some next level to pleasure. We can't get fulfillment by simply piling on positive experience after positive experience until fleeting pleasure turns into lasting fulfillment. They lie on completely different paths as one is from the external and the other is fuelled by the internal. When we separate our sense of accomplishment from the external, we begin to feel that sense of accomplishment and progress in each moment regardless of its composition. Thus we can begin to shift reality not with our hands, but with our perceptions, leading to responses that stem from empathy and caring even in the face of sorrow and anger. Suffering becomes another unique experience to be lived through rather than judged, as does pleasure, and in that form we can love life without needing to control it. 