---
layout: post
title:  "Anger"
date:   2019-05-26 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Anger can be thrilling. It can be exhilirating and freeing. One can get drunk and giddy on anger. Anger can feel righteous and like nothing can stand in your way for you *are* the way. There is no questioning in anger, only rage fuelled by the truth. The way you feel is reality and to be so close to reality is dizzying. 

Doubt, curiosity and reason are pushed aside completely as we act entirely on impulse in the present moment. It's an interesting state of mind to be in. If it wasn't so destructive it might even be an amazing way to experiment with flow state and living in the present moment. Prehaps we can learn quite a bit about ourselves by experiencing anger. We might be surprised what we're capable of under the influence of that kind of all encompassing emotion. Realizing that we're only one or two emotional steps away from being a completely different person than we often think of ourselves as can help us look at ourselves differently and learn to be open to surprising reactions from ourselves. 

Too often we set expectations for our behaviour and are surprised when we break them. Sometimes we bury the truth when we defy our expectations because we can't let go of our idea of who we are and what our values are. The first step to living according to your rational values is realizing that your emotions can and likely will affect those values in different moments. It's a constant learning process to quicken our response time to emotional states, so that each time we observe the emotion sooner rather than later. As long as we deny the existence of the emotion, we will continue to deceive ourselves and learn nothing from our valuable moments of anger. 