---
layout: post
title:  "Deceptive Victory"
date:   2019-05-12 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Winning isn't always in our best interests. It often feels great, but sometimes it represents a setback rather than progress. Sometimes defeat is exactly what we need to move forward, to progress, and to grow. Winning at the wrong time can be the very success that roots us in place. Other times the pursuit of victory can cause us to hurt those we care about, often exacting a win at a heavy price to our relationships. It's important to question our motivations behind our pursuits and wonder at what a win will really do for us. This can be all it takes to notice the impermanence of our own goals and highlight what we truly care about. In this way we can be proactive about our goals, seeing ahead and predicting how they will change us rather than accepting that they are good simply because we want them. 

Generally we assume victory is progress and defeat is a step backwards, but that mindset often leads us to seek shallow victories that harm us in the long-run. Victory at the expense of someone else is a setback to us, even if we don't realize it immediately. Victory at the expense of our physical or mental health is similarly so. We see that last one in so many work cultures today where it's considered honorable to work yourself to the bone, neglecting sleep, nutrition and exercise in favour of short-term productivity. Any healthy company would know that its long-term interests lie elsewhere and that that kind of culture only serves to hurt their bottom-line. We assume victory feels good, and that when we feel good we must have won at something. But sometimes that feeling of accomplishment is from our ego and it's masking the truth. Victory can make us feel productive and busy even when we're questioning the meaning in what we do. It can keep us trapped in unhealthy patterns that feel productive but keep us from experimenting and exploring. And perhaps most dangerously of all, victory can keep us from failing in the ways we need to to understand ourselves and the world better. Success rarely teaches us the deep lessons that failure can impart, which is why if we can learn to feel victory in mistakes, in failing, in growing and in discomfort, we can truly progress regardless of how the world defines our success. It's time to take that definition into our own hands and choose the perspective that helps us grow best. 