---
layout: post
title:  "Independence"
date:   2019-05-05 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

It's overrated. We're built to depend on each other. We didn't evolve as individuals but as tribes. It's why empathy and altruism come so naturally to us. Our need to belong is effectively our need to survive. The issue that comes into play is when our dependency is founded on unhealthy principles. Collective fear or hatred, for example, are great examples of unstable foundations for a healthily dependant society. We often see independence as the solution, but that comes with its own problems. A culture that encourages reliance on each other enables people to take risks and make sacrifices knowing that their best interests are looked out for. Feeling safe is exactly what enables us to risk ourselves for the greater good. Feeling like you need to tackle every problem by yourself is a sure path to an early retirement, but knowing that you can ask around for help and also feel like you are depended on to contribute to the solutions of others enables you to sustainably work together rather than burn out on your own. 

So many options open up to us when we begin to account for the vast potential of the people around us to contribute to our problems. Even more so when we consider that by making ourselves actively available to help others, we get to grow in ways many people rarely consider. This kind of mutualism is the basis of what it means to be human, but it's been lost in the sea of voices telling us we have to look out for our best interests and help ourselves first. We fail to realize that offering help is in our best interests, and learning to consistently ask for help is not a loss of independence but a healthy foundation of human reliance. Far too many of us aren't taught how to build this foundation ourselves or the value it holds. Malcolm Gladwell explored this somewhat in an interesting way in *Outliers*, a book where he delved into how circumstances and happenstance contributed to peoples' success, sometimes more than their own decisions. One thing he found was that kids born to rich families had certain advantages. They were taught from a young age that they were entitled to help. They learnt that it was okay to bother someone to ask for help, or to bring something up that didn't sit well with you. Kids from poorer families on the other hand were often taught the opposite; to ask for help only as a last resort, and to generally avoid being a bother if it could be helped. The funny thing is it's a known psychological effect that being helped by someone makes them like you more. In fact, rather than doing someone a favour if you want them to do you a favour in the future, a better way to build that foundation is to get them to do you a small, seemingly insignificant favour. It makes them much more likely to do you a bigger favour in the future. Learning to ask for help also means that you learn to build meaningful relationships, because meaningful relationships are often founded on altruistic acts, no matter which way they flow. Often it's easier to get someone to do you a small altruistic favour than it is to figure out a way to do them a small altruistic favour, which means kids that learn to ask for help often build more relationships with strangers than kids that learn to bother others only when necessary. 

People kind of like being bothered because it acknowledges not just their existence, but their capabilities and value too. It's a very human trait to appreciate being called upon; to enjoy feeling needed. In a way, choosing to be independent in a world filled with human beings is one of the most selfish choices we can make. Consider going out of your comfort zone sometime and asking for help when you rather wouldn't; you might find that it makes someone else's day. 