---
layout: post
title:  "Traditional"
date:   2019-06-20 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

When we think of defying traditions, we imagine opting for a smaller wedding, going for rock-climbing and dinner with a date instead of a movie and dinner, or having a staycation to thoroughly explore local culture and be a temporary tourist in our own city. We don't usually think of our habits around avoiding conflict to keep relationships healthy or settling for meaningless yet well-paying work as traditions. We feel like our choices in these areas are individual to us and serve our best interests. They fit into a realistic world where one must be discerning and use wise judgment. 

Yet our form of wise judgment is a product of traditions long passed down; not overtly, but with a nudge of encouragement here and a whisper of admonishment there. The tradition of treating others as you would like to be treated, which hinders our capability to learn to treat others as *they* would like to be treated. The tradition of seeking to be understood rather than seeking to understand. The tradition of correcting others before ourselves. The tradition of using our emotions as moral fuel.  These traditions are passed down with the best of intentions, but they also originate from a place of fear. In fearing to fail or be taken advantage of, we've come up with simple, effective ways to pass down flawed wisdom. The wisdom is passable enough that it prevents disaster and delivers just enough results that it's difficult for us to question it ourselves. It may keep us from failing, but it also keeps us from really succeeding. We end up settling for certain mediocrity instead of uncertain failure or success. The problem is that failure teaches and success emboldens, while mediocrity is like quicksand, keeping us in place and only pulling us deeper if we ever struggle. So we stop struggling. We stop questioning. We simply believe, and we act, and we tell ourselves that this is just the way the world is. 

To question tradition is also to question oneself long before questioning the external. We are all the product of seen and unseen traditions and accepting that doesn't immediately change that. In fact, that's the very kind of implicit belief that stops us before we ever get started. We believe we're different, that we have seen the light. But when we're under stress and someone's pushing our buttons in all the wrong ways, we blow up. We may regret it afterwards, but we also console ourselves. They should have seen it coming, the way they were acting... They had it coming. Every time we set out to teach someone a lesson or help someone see the error in their ways, we chip away at our own humanity, simply because we aren't equally open to having them teach us a lesson or help us see the error in our ways. We're always so certain we're on the right side of things, if not factually then at least morally, that we lose sight of the opportunities to learn from our greatest allies; everyone we will ever meet. 

There is always a reason a choice or a belief comes easily to us. All we must do is to want to look for it, but that is the hardest part. Most of the time we don't even believe there's a reason. We just think of it as natural and sensible. But if we ask ourselves what tradition our default choice fits into, we will often find the answers that can help us craft better choices. Choices that do not choose between meaning and money, but instead choose both. Not between respect and honesty, but instead both. Not between seeking to understand or being assertive, but instead both. When we choose to look for ways to fulfill both of the conditions that at first seem so opposed to us, our minds begin to get creative and experiment with new beliefs and perspectives. The problem isn't that we aren't capable of crafting extraordinary solutions. It's that we settle for the ordinary, traditional ones long before we even try for the extraordinary.



