---
layout: post
title:  "Last Line of Defence"
date:   2019-05-04 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Our last line of defence is our sense of reasoning, generally motivated by our emotional need for comfort and self-worth. It's hard to accept something that should make sense if it makes us feel bad about ourselves, so we get around that by finding ways for it not to make sense to us in the first place. This is what makes our last line of defence our sense of motivated reasoning. If something doesn't make sense to us, we dismiss it without considering the possibility that something can be true without making sense to us. Our final layer of judgment is rarely an objective measure of reality or what is true, effective, or meaningful. It's generally just a pointer for us to better understand what makes us feel good about ourselves and the world to which we relate. This is rarely something we consider, even when we're trying to grow and learn outside of our judgment's bounds. We end up losing out on lots of potential learning because we toss out so many ideas before we've even given them a fair shot. 

This is why it's so important to learn to detach our sense of self-worth from our behaviour. The less we judge ourselves, the more difficult it becomes for self-deception to take place. By definition self-deception happens outside of our awareness, making it tricky to identify and fix. It's often something we have to cure in advance rather than treat afterwards. If all we do is treat it, we're doomed to repeat it. Learning to question our final defensive layer of beliefs can allow us to grow in bounds and leaps rather than the little drips of motivational insight we're accustomed to lapping up. That kind of progress is like quicksand because it keeps us distracted from the core of our problems that matter most, but are the most discomforting to address. We get all the reward of progress while progressing very little, getting what we want but not what we need. One way to begin is to question our motivations. When we start to understand exactly why some lines of reasoning make us feel good and others make us feel bad, we can learn to explore the uncomfortable a little bit more openly, even if it doesn't make sense to us at first. We can learn to see that when stuff makes sense too easily, it's often because it's the path of least resistance to feeling good about ourselves. When we dig deeper, we find that the real answers aren't nearly as pretty as we want, but much more useful to us than we expect.