---
layout: post
title:  "The Dunning-Kruger Effect"
date:   2019-01-30 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Knowledge is pretty neutral. The way we interpret new knowledge and subsequently put it to use is generally a good marker of how we think and what we desire. The way people often use knowledge of the Dunning-Kruger effect is a great example of this. It can either be used to put others down and feel superior, or it can used to empathize and understand others. In summary, the Dunning-Kruger effect outlines the idea that the less skilled or knowledgeable you are at something, the more you will tend to overestimate your skill. When you don't know what you don't know, it's natural to believe that your knowledge is the entirety of knowledge possible. The flip side is that an expert at something is more likely to underestimate their skill, because they've been exposed to the vast swaths of unknown knowledge they haven't touched yet. They have some idea of what they don't know, so they tend to err on the side of uncertainty. An amateur is more likely to be confident in their assessment of themselves, while an expert is more likely to be tentative. 

We come across plenty of these examples in everyday life, but the way we approach them makes the real difference. If we see an amateur falling prey to the effect and we use that as an excuse to put them down or make fun of them, then we are in our own way falling prey to the effect as well. We're using our knowledge in a way that assumes it's all there is to know, rather than looking towards the unknown and using it to empathize. The reality is that if we were in that amateur's shoes, we would likely be just as confident in our superiority. By treating them with empathy, we can help by showing them parts of the skill they haven't been exposed to yet, potentially instilling some tentativeness and curiosity within them. However, if we approach them as an ignorant lost cause, then our own certainty will be our downfall. Sometimes we let a small inkling of knowledge we have, such as our awareness of the Dunning-Kruger effect, to give us false confidence and it becomes a tool to feed our ego rather than our curiosity. We unwittingly become the very thing we abhor. So much of knowledge, especially of the human mind, follows this pattern. It's far too easy to build a barrier between our knowledge and our existence, so that even though we're aware of something, we continue to fall prey to it while being utterly confident that we've broken free of it. 

It's worth questioning our sureness. 