---
layout: post
title:  "Reactivity"
date:   2019-05-11 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Throughout history we've lived out a pattern of reactivity rather than proactivity. We've almost always addressed problems after they caused harm beyond repair rather than when we began to suspect they would grow out of control. If that pattern continues, the way we address climate change might just be too little late. We might fix the problem after it's already caused irreparable damage. Does this same pattern apply to our personal lives too? Do we only attempt to change ourselves or break habits when they reach some breaking point of causing damage? It seems like the human brain isn't cut out for responsible long-term thinking and it responds to short-term fears and consequences much more effectively than long-term pressures, even if they are life-threatening. We see this in the way we brush off healthy eating unless we really want to lose weight or a medical diagnosis forces us to rethink our diets. We see it in the way many of us neglect dental health until the threat of heavy pain or surgery is imminent. We see it in the way we struggle to develop and stick to regular exercise regimens despite the overwhelmingly growing evidence that supports the long-term health value of exercise, often only committing ourselves to physical health and wellness only when we suffer a life-changing injury or diagnosis. Funnily enough a recent study related to exercise found that people who began exercising in middle-age saw nearly as much long-term benefit as those who began exercising early on in their life. Some may see this as an excuse to put it off, but the way I see it, there's no better time to start than now. A colleague of mine began exercising in earnest after an injury that forced him to rethink his physical health. One of his lifelong regrets has been that he didn't start earlier, and I hope this study reduces his regret, but I'm sure this will be a common theme as we grow up. 

We do see some cultures take the opposite approach, where they prioritize proactivity, such as paying doctors to keep people healthy rather than just curing them as problems arise. What leads to this difference in thinking? Part of it might be the societal standards that we set. Culture plays a huge role in this as people raised to put their best interests ahead of their short-term desires are much more likely to naturally do so. Another aspect is the willingness to share our mistakes and learn from each other. My colleague was open about his story and his personal regret, allowing me to learn from his reactivity. Instead of burying our mistakes, we need to showcase them so that we can learn from each other. The best part is that each of us is constantly making mistakes in vastly different directions, allowing generational gaps to be bridged by the commonality of our human experience. We can learn from nearly anyone's mistakes, as long as they've led a different life than us, which is nearly always the case. 