---
layout: post
title:  "Surrealism"
date:   2019-01-04 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

I was at a creative mornings talk by Tiko Kerr this morning and it shed some light on a very unique perspective. A Canadian painter and outspoken HIV activist, Tiko had some really interesting stories to share. At one point he had to fight the Canadian government to get access to risky, unauthorized but potentially life-saving drugs. They denied him at first but eventually relented after a media push and political outcry. Tiko's struggle with HIV seems to have only emboldened his art and pushed him towards work that he truly cares about. The way he spoke about his art these days made it sound like he's never been more in the zone. He's experimenting with more abstract styles and allowing his subconscious to dictate more and more of the flow and pace of his work. Looking at some of his pieces, I could certainly feel that they came from a place deeper than a well practiced hand driven by rationality. 

I seem to constantly run into this message that our conscious mind only has so much to offer us, especially when we're trying to tap into our deepest wells of creativity. For Tiko, he doesn't even consider his work or creativity generated by himself; he considers them the work of muses reaching into our world through him. The potential of our subconscious is truly astounding, but only when we can trust it, no matter how surreal the results may seem. They are often worth it beyond our wildest dreams.

