---
layout: post
title:  "Experiential Self vs. Remembering Self"
date:   2019-06-21 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

Research in the field of psychology has discovered that our present-self, in the moment reports of fulfillment are distinct from our overall satisfaction with our lives and even our memories of those same moments. When we make decisions, we are often balancing between these two selves and deciding how much to lean towards what we perceive as long-term fulfillment vs. experiential fulfillment. A common way to imagine this difference is to imagine yourself planning a three week vacation of your choice. However, at the end of the vacation, your memories of it as well as any photos, notes or other records are erased permanently. Would you plan this vacation any differently than if it were more normal and you knew you would get to keep your memories and photos intact afterwards?

Part of why this difference exists is because we don't just make choices that will make us happy, but that we also want to be able to look back upon and be proud of. We make choices and choose experiences that fit into our image of a good life well lived, which could look very different from a life spent prioritizing only the most fulfilling experiences with no regard to how we might judge the memories afterwards. What fascinates me about this is that this difference is something we can consciously learn about, but can we use it to change the way we think and make choices? 

If you had a psychologist follow you around for a day checking in on your reported levels of happiness every so often, the picture their data will put together might be very different from your own memory and reported happiness levels at different points in the day. Entire swaths of unhappy moments can be covered up by a single bright or particularly joyful moment near the end. *That made my day,* as we say. The opposite is equally true, as memories of perfectly fulfilling days can be ruined by a single bad experience near the end of them. I wonder if two people could have equally fulfilling days when polled moment to moment, and then have one different perception of the same event near the end of the day, and end up giving two completely different remembered stories of their happiness throughout the entire day.

Our present feelings cannot help but influence both our memory and our imagination, so perhaps the key to fulfillment is rooted in the present rather than the future. As long as we hinge our happiness on a future goal, we may be far less likely to be in the optimal state of being to even achieve that goal. But if we can find ways to be happy in the present moment, we may operate much more optimally to achieve any of those future goals. The unintuitive part of this is that we often implicitly tie success to discontentment. We don't entirely want to be content because we believe it might make us lazy or unmotivated to succeed in the ways we've defined are important to us. Perhaps our lack of fulfillment does not stem from a lack of success, but rather an unwillingness to define success as contentment in the present rather than future achievement. We feel like that kind of definition of success is a cop-out, or a character flaw, or simply an excuse fit only for those who cannot push through and succeed in real ways. 

We don't like questioning our definition of real success, perhaps because one of the possible answers is that it's accessible to us anytime. It's only our ego that decides that a success that the world applauds is more meaningful, real, or fulfilling than a success that the world doesn't applaud. The irony in all this of course is that those who choose to redefine success for themselves often achieve conventional success too, because it becomes a natural byproduct of living freely in the moment. And yet this conventional success does not own them, and if it were all to vanish, they need not feel unhappiness or as failures. The more we can consider these questions and their alternatives answers, the more our desires and wants shift towards uncertainty and obscurity, such that eventually desire becomes difficult to define. We no longer need to wait for fulfillment or have it be conditional to a certain image of our lives. Instead it becomes perpetual and all encompassing, being both the means and the end rather than merely the end. 

