---
layout: post
title:  "Capability Vs. Net Motivation"
date:   2019-04-09 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

We aren't just bounded by what we're capable of accomplishing. We're also bounded by  the complex factors that drive our motivation and likelihood of acting upon our desires. There are plenty of things we know we can do, even want to do, but never actually attempt to do. Our motivation stems from more than just desire, since that desire has to be stronger than every force it's up against, such as fear, doubt or plain old lethargy. Our net motivation to act on a desire needs to be positive after all of these subtractions. That's where other people can add huge value to our lives in ways we don't often realize. If I am physically, mentally, and emotionally capable of doing something, but I don't, even if I've wanted to forever, that's because my net motivation is negative. Nothing will change until the factors in that equation shift. Someone who comes along and motivates me enough to change that net probability from a negative to a positive does exactly that; they change some of the factors. Perhaps they unwittingly cause me to put my pride on the line, making me more likely to act to impress them. Perhaps they encourage me by alleviating my fears and giving me a taste of what success might feel like. Perhaps they spark a competitive drive in me that pushes me to excel. In every single case they have effectively turned my impossible into the possible. 

We don't often look at it this way, but actions that are in a state of negative net motivation are essentially impossible until that changes. We heavily appreciate the very literal act of someone opening up our possibilities in obvious ways, such as teaching us new skills or introducing us to people we were unlikely to meet ourselves. However, when someone shifts our net motivation into the positive, they have the exact same effect as this. The outcome is just as effective for us. Yet we are rarely cognizant of this, and thus rarely grateful. If we don't realize that they shifted our net motivation, we won't look into how and why they did so. This means we won't be able to learn from the experience and be on the look out for future opportunities to influence our net motivation or reach out to others for help with it. This is a huge disadvantage we place on ourselves since it limits our growth capabilities to only the obvious shift from phsyically impossible to physically impossible. By consciously learning about this concept and applying it to our lives, we open up our avenues of growth to additionally include shifts from motivationally impossible to motivationally possible, more than doubling our capability to improve.

There's much more room for us to grow than we realize. We just have to be looking in the places we least expect to find them.
