---
layout: post
title:  "Core Core Values"
date:   2019-07-05 13:54:15 -0700
categories: blog post
---

I remember discovering the concept of core values and writing about them almost a year ago. Stuff like Curiosity, Mouldability, Trust etc. It struck me recently in conversation with a friend that there may be another set of core values that are even more core to us... Perhaps uncomfortably so. These are the core values we often act upon and build ourselves around, but rarely bring up in polite, or even impolite, conversation. Stuff like likeability, power, influence. Statements that came up in the conversation were ones like: *I want friends in powerful places*, *I want to have the power to change someone's life forever*, *I want to be charming and eloquent*. It's odd because they don't seem like values to us, and yet so many of the choices we make end up reflecting these desires of ours. Our need to be liked sticks out to me especially, especially by ourselves. Even when we're used to being not being accepted or liked by most people, it seems like we work so hard to be worthy of our own respect and admiration. 

Meaning, impact, comfort, safety, stability, freedom, how skilled we feel at whatever we pride ourselves in... It's fascinating how these values of ours play out in our day to day lives as we interact with others and ourselves, making decisions and even experiencing thoughts and emotions. If these core core values were to change, would we change too? A version of me with different distributions of core core values seems like he might as well be an entirely different person. I'm curious if there's a way to measure how we prioritize these values emotionally or subconsciously, rather than rationally. Our circumstances also seem to bring out very different sets of behaviour and a different focus on values, so it's certainly not an aspect of us that exists in a vacuum. In that sense we are very different people in different circumstances, and we rarely get to study ourselves inside a vacuum. Is there something like a base version of us that then gets affected by circumstance and pulled or pushed towards certain tendencies of thought and behaviour? If there is, how would we even go about observing it? Perhaps that's where approaching as empty a state of mind as possible can be valuable, such as in meditation. Even our judgments of ourselves change based on the circumstances as sometimes we may be reminded of certain moral values and place a heavier focus on them, while other times we may passively let them slide, even though we still believe in them. In a state where we are unaffected by outside circumstance pressure and unaffected by internal judgment and expectation, perhaps we can begin to understand our base selves. It may not even be a single self to understand, but multiple. 