---
layout: post
title:  Pacing 
date:   2020-11-05 12:00:00 -0700
categories: blog
tags: 
---

Progress doesn't mean much if it can't be sustained for long. Pacing yourself is about finding ways to fuel that progress continuously. It's a dynamic process that evolves over time, so it's unrealistic to expect it to be a build-and-forget process. Going between extremes of no progress and lots of progress could also work.

Expecting fluctuations is also part of pacing. Things don't always remain great and it's realistic to plan for disaster or downturns. One's mood and general outlook shouldn't be banked on, so expecting some down months or down years in a lifetime is prudent. Pacing a life is about utilizing time and energy well for the long-term, which can turn out to be quite interesting in practice. The well paced life has plenty of room for personal interests, enjoyment, productivity, and self-growth. What it likely doesn't have time for are the aspects of life that detract from one's goals. 

Just like running, you likely don't want to stop entirely. You can jog or you can sprint, but try to keep walking at the very least. Once you stop, it can be much harder to get started again. Sometimes speeding up your pace is what it takes to break the inertia of a crawl you want to escape. 

Not too fast, not too slow, or sprint+walk bursts. It's up to you, but check in on your pacing and see if it suits your purposes. If it doesn't, try changing it around a bit.  























