---
layout: post
title:  Ethical Persuasion          
date:   2020-11-08 12:00:00 -0700
categories: blog
tags: seth, sivers, 
---

This has been a tough issue for me to grapple with. Persuasion adds lots of value to the world in a meaningful way. People are persuaded to overcome their own fears in ways they are glad to have done, perpetually in the future. People are persuaded to try something they wouldn't have tried on their own, and end up being glad to have done it. Anyone who sets out to change anything, even in themselves, is inherently engaging in some form of persuasion. The issue I've been grappling with is how persuasive I should be willing to learn to be, or actually be in practice. At what point is persuasion clearly wrong? If it's about intent, plenty of persuasion is done with the best of intentions to poor results. If it's about results, plenty of persuasion is done towards great results but perhaps brought about my methods that we would consider manipulative. Our standards of manipulation seem to evolve over time, with plenty of persuasion today being done digitally, through the design of User Experiences. An example of this is [Dark Patterns](https://darkpatterns.org/types-of-dark-pattern.html "Dark Patterns - User Experiences"), a set of UI/UX designs that are potentially misleading and predatory. Many of these dark patterns rely on mismatches of expectations between customers and the interface. Surprise costs at the end of a purposefully lengthy checkout process, to encourage consumers to finalize their purchase after all the time and effort they've sunk into it emotionally. 

Persuasion in person could also rely on factors like this, such as persistence to whittle someone down, or relying on social norms to make a quick sale on something like a vacuum cleaner. Perhaps the negative reputation salesmen have comes from this. When persuasion leads to the sale of something someone doesn't need, is that unethical? The line between need and want is fuzzy, which makes it complicated.  

My initial thought was that being ethically persuasive must be even more difficult, because of additional rules on sales choices, but I'm not so sure about that anymore. Some of the best examples of ethical salespeople I've seen, like Zig Ziglar, seemed to thrive on building long-term trust. Zig was not just more effective at persuasion in the long run, but also happier for it. A story Seth Godin shares in his book *Linchpin* is specifically about Zig taking the long-term approach to serving customers rather than following the lead of other travelling salespeople. They would spend just a day or two in town trying to pick up all the easy, quick sales, before moving on to the next town. Zig would stay for weeks, get to know people, understand their needs well, and then sell them products based on trust. I don't know if this led to people being sold products they needed more, but maybe long-term customer satisfaction is about more than just the product. Selling an experience, a story, a memory, might all be valid and valuable parts of the transaction too.

Companies that are willing to damage long-term trust with people for short-term sales are going to see issues in the process. I'm curious what ethically persuasive user experiences would look like, but there are already hints out there. People raved about their experiences with Derek Sivers' CD Baby, in part because CD Baby put its customers first. They were profitable not despite being ethical, but *because* they set out to care about customers first. They made the process easy for customers, whether to purchase or to return, or to ask for crazy requests. The underrated part of ethical persuasion is also enabling people to be comfortable enough to ask for things they usually wouldn't ask, and finding creative win/win solutions because of that approach. CD Baby's customers were their greatest form of advertising because they enjoyed the experiences they had with the company. 

All of this rambling makes me realize that perhaps ethical approaches to anything sn't about avoiding all the harmful or wrong things one could be doing. It's about finding creative ways to serve people and make them happy. A proactive approach to improving peoples' experiences and making their lives easier and more fun. (Sometimes easy and fun are at odds with each other, but that's a whole other discussion). 

So many aspects of digital design become industry standard, like pop-up windows asking people to sign up for newsletters or log in to an account to see more, but people are becoming desensitized to them and learning to just click past them. They'll continue to generate conversion results for websites, but not indefinitely. The more important element becomes trust, and trust is sort of self-protecting. When someone tries to use shortcuts to build trust, people eventually learn about it and spread the word. Genuine trust isn't generated by copying or innovating a single policy, system or design that can be implemented forever. Instead, it's an approach that relies on constant improvement and a willingness to infinitely and continuously change systems, policies and design, guided by the compass of serving others. Dynamic rather than static. A posture rather than a place.

I think at times we can get locked into thinking we know what's good for people even better than they do for themselves. I don't think that kind of thinking can ever work in the long-term. We're going to be wrong about what's good for people, but it's also worth trying things out. There's always a risk of acting badly by making mistakes. No amount of good intention protects someone from messing up either, but if we're genuinely willing to learn from mistakes that damage trust, then long-term progress is always possible. When we seek to make people's lives better in ways *they* care about, we enrich our lives in the process too. By being tentative about that process, we can learn from our judgment of other people's enjoyment of things. Disappointing or angering people is inevitable in the short-term, but in the long-term we have a lot more influence on how we handle things to create value for others and ourselves. 


























