---
layout: post
title:  Thoughts on Change (In People)
date:   2020-10-26 12:00:00 -0700
categories: blog
tags: sivers
---

Something I've been thinking about recently is how much I've changed in certain ways over the last two years since I started writing this blog. One of the personal fears I noticed repeatedly was this idea that if I changed too much, I might seem really weird to friends/family/people who know me and they might not really recognize me except by their idea of me. If I change significantly in a few months and someone doesn't interact with me in that timespan, when they see me again, they would expect me to mostly be the same person they know. I ended up experiencing this as I changed significantly and met with old friends who hadn't seen me in months. I no longer really belonged in the same way, and my interactions with them were more awkward (for lack of a more accurate word to describe it). It took some time to rebuild that familiarity and for them to see glimpses of me that they could recognize and identify as the person they knew. Even the people who saw me change massively and accepted the new me didn't expect me to change again though. It's like they could tie the change back to who I was, get used to me, but would have to go through that process again the next time while still being surprised/weirded out by the new version of me. 

The context and expectations matter, I'm sure. If I show up at a 10 year high school reunion or something, then I imagine people would expect or at least be less surprised by some significant changes in personality. We expect people to change from high school into early adulthood, but we don't expect adults to change much. Especially not adults who've built stable, consistent lives and routines. 9-5 jobs, stable careers, starting a family, social commitments etc. all contribute towards a kind of stability that minimizes change and reduces new experiences. Unless a person is actively looking for ways to change certain aspects of themselves while they're engaging in these activities, they aren't really left with much time to actively try to change themselves or practice new ways of being. And if change is considered boring or work rather than fun, then it makes sense that most people become less likely to choose to change unless their routine is changed for some reason (or they choose to change it for some extraordinary/unexpected reason.)

I think most of us aren't really used to people changing significantly unless they go through some major tragedy or life-changing event, like a car accident or losing a loved one. Events like this put things into perspective and often change someone's routine temporarily, such as through a stay in the hospital or some time off from work spent grieving. It seems like many schools of philosophy advocate thinking about one's life and priorities as a regular habit rather than in response to tragedies. Stoicism comes to mind as one example of reflecting on and considering alternative, counterfactual versions of life (often ones that could be worse) to better appreciate one's existing life. Actively looking at one's current life structure can help an individual take control of the changes in their life rather than having those changes be controlled and led unconsciously by culture/society/norms.  

 I've been wondering if major personality changes are worth engaging in repeatedly and consistently, by choice, throughout every stage of aging/life (if I assume they're possible to trigger/control or somehow engage in by choice).

I guess that's part of the environment that's enabled me to change so much: not much of a consistent routine or stable job or specific life identity for long. This change isn't necessarily a good thing, and lots of it has been destabilizing, but I'm wondering if there's a way to build a stable, structured life while still being open to changing core parts of myself whenever they show up as potentially worth changing/experimenting with. I was a much meaner and more insensitive person in middle school and still have some painful memories of simply being mean to other people. I wasn't exactly a bully, but I had moments of lashing out that are shameful to think about today. In part, some of those memories and incidents have shaped me into being much more socially careful and less willing to take social risks (such as teasing someone or making fun of them). It's led to me developing my empathy and practicing it but... It's taken me too far to the other end where I miss out on some of the meaningful relationship building that happens from some good-natured teasing done with skill and sensitivity to context. I can build that skill through further empathy and practice now that I've noticed my tendency to be too cautious and miss out on ways to improve relationships in the process, so it's not too painful to notice that I've become that way. The relevant question to me is: Can I turn around 10 years from now, when I'm 35, and look back and see genuine ways I've improved consciously at certain aspects of my personality and way of thinking and behaving? Can I remain flexible to change and continue to consciously change, well into my 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s? I don't know the answer. I don't know when it would get difficult, or if it ever should. 

More likely is that I might not want to change much anymore once certain factors in my life change. I don't think the main factor is age. We're changing the way aging works, both physically (people get to live longer but also delay the onset of aging related issues, including cancer, dementia, back pain etc.) and also culturally (people feel more free today than ever before to lead nontraditional lifestyles involving lots of travelling, less stable jobs, no children or spouse etc.). That being said, it's unrealistic to expect that I won't change in certain ways. Traditions exist because they work. They create well-worn paths of stability that people can easily follow, and also easily get accurate advice on because more experienced people who also approximately lived by those traditions would have experienced and overcome similar issues when they were younger. Maybe the only reason I haven't been much for tradition has been because I've usually rebelled against tradition and authority. Alternatively, I recently came across this [blurb in Derek Sivers' "About Me" page](https://sive.rs/about?source=post_page---------------------------#content:~:text=averse%20to%20traditions "Derek Sivers - About Me - Averse to Traditions") where he describes some aspects of himself that are culturally West-coast American. He realized this when he started to travel and experienced other cultures. The ones I relate to personally are having weak family ties, being averse to tradition, being quick to open up emotionally, and having meals that last only a few minutes. No doubt I identified with some of those after I read them rather than beforehand, but it's also insightful because I never viewed my habits and behaviours from a West-coast Canadian perspective. I always thought most of my habits and cultures would have come from India and my parents/family, but it makes sense that since I was rebellious, I got steeped more into local Vancouver (and online culture from online friends) instead.

I feel lucky to have grown up with such a deep cultural connection with the internet, where most of my closest friends are from entirely different countries and sub-cultures. Ranging from Southeast Asian to Western European, Iran to Britain, to many of the subcultures in different U.S. states, I never realized just how much meaningful cultural exposure can happen over the internet. It must be strange to some people to consider that online relationships can be meaningful, but I've realized they can be very deep and built on more mutual honesty, trust and understanding (and often far more quickly) than many of the real life relationships I've experienced have been. Lots of thoughts on that subject, but that's a post for another day I guess. It's just interesting to see how the culture I'm in evolves in some sense, and how the internet has changed things so quickly for the most recent generations. The teenagers I know today are also in an entirely different set of cultures from the one I've grown up in, and it's fascinating to study the few similarities and many, many differences between experiences there. 

I think changing aspects of my identity and my personality is something I want to prioritize daily or weekly and work on consciously, in public writing and other mediums that are difficult to fool myself in, but I'm realizing just how many things can change my priorities. If I ever start a family or do other fairly normal life commitment things, how exactly will that change my priorities? Will I be glad to have changed my priorities that way, or is it something I'll be doing more out of social/cultural pressure and my own idea of it being normal for that stage of life? I don't know the answers well in advance, but it seems worth considering. Assuming I won't change to have some more culturally standard elements in my life in some sense seems like a mistake. It's likely that the more standard elements of life I integrate and take on, the more I'll run into other ways to stabilize that life. Kind of by chance and kind of by choice, I've ended up in very differing situations in a short timespan and I can see some of the difference in how I was like between the different situations. I've gained more respect and admiration for people who manage their lives well and stick to their values in all kinds of challenging situations, while still remaining flexible on those values over long periods of time. It seems like a conflict, but somehow there's this combination of stability and flexibility that is possible to build and maintain, and it's worth working towards. 

I'm still trying to figure out how to work towards that personally. It's hard to list the specific values I'd want to change because I can remember situations where I've been too far on one extreme or another. These aren't easily prescribed fixes and are much more context dependent, so what's good for me won't usually be good for another person. It's a constantly evolving process of self-discovery and diagnosis + testing changes. Most of my personality changes over the last two years have happened without my conscious involvement, and they've been more environmental or context based. I haven't been tracking them well, so figuring out how to notice and begin to direct some of those changes by conscious choice is an ongoing practice. 

My attachment to my identity is often subtle. It's usually based on an identity that isn't even the one most other people identify me with. Each person in my life has a different sense of who I am, and I have a sense of myself that's different from who I actually am in this moment. It's that sense of identity that makes me feel dissatisfied with who I am. It seems like much of meditation/spirituality/mindfulness is about accepting myself in the moment and being honest with my understanding of who I currently am. The further apart my sense of identity is from who I actually am, the easier it is to lie to myself and avoid facing some more accurate interpretations of my actions/thoughts/feelings. 

I'm linking together lots of issues that can likely be treated separately, like identity + social norms/social belonging. I figure that there must be a way of existing that can be built by a person that involves an identity they genuinely prefer that doesn't compromise for social/cultural or other external reasons. It's difficult for me to make that internal/external distinction accurately because so many cultural and social norms are a major unconscious part of who I am today. <br>I only notice them when I spot differences between how I seem to act/think and how other people act/think. Often I'm making guesses and trying to figure out why the differences exist, and I'm basically always inaccurate in my guesses. Looking for differences between what I think and what I say, as well as what I say and what I do, has also been valuable for learning. There are differences in reasons for why different people do similar things in similar situations, and I have to be careful not to stereotype or quickly judge people. The more open I can be to correcting misconceptions I don't yet know I have, the better I can build this overall understanding of different options for identity and behaviour. 

<hr>

Gonna sign off and publish this post here since I've spent two hours writing and have been using it to procrastinate sleeping. I realized I'm really bad at cutting stuff once I've written a lot, so will need to practice and get better at that skill if the goal of this blog ends up being publically useful, generous work rather than self-reflective, fairly self-centered work. Currently my posts are fairly self-centered/personal journal like, but there's a path towards learning to write for a specific audience + be happy about the writing myself rather than paying no attention to a particular audience and writing just for myself. Part of the value in paying attention to an audience is it puts me on the hook to think and write clearly rather than be all over the place like the paragraphs in this post. Will experiment with that tomorrow. 




























