---
layout: post
title:  Conflicts in Learning
date:   2020-10-11 00:08:00 -0700
categories: blog feynman
---

>Each generation that discovers something from its experience must pass that on, but it must pass that on with a delicate balance of respect and disrespect, so that the [human] race--now that it is aware of the disease to which it is liable--does not inflict its errors too rigidly on its youth, but it does pass on the accumulated wisdom, plus the wisdom that it may not be wisdom.
<br><br>
It is necessary to teach both to accept and to reject the past with a kind of balance that takes considerable skill. Science alone of all the subjects contains within itself the lesson of the danger of belief in the infallibility of the greatest teachers of the preceding generation.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;__&mdash; [Richard Feynman](http://www.fotuva.org/online/frameload.htm?/online/science.htm 'What is Science? - 1966')__

I came across this fascinating transcript of a talk Feynman gave in 1966 to the National Science Teachers Association. I highly recommend it to anyone interested in education, learning, or science. He shares how his dad taught him science and, and throughout the talk he also uses different stories and metaphors to try to get at what science might be. 

> As a matter of fact, I can also define science another way: Science is the belief in the ignorance of experts.

His dad helped him understand answers to specific questions, but also helped him understand how to better think about the questions and answers in the first place. His dad also admitted when he didn't know something, but didn't use that as an excuse to shy away from explaining it as best he could. Even when explaining concepts like inertia, his dad made clear the difference between what he understood about how things worked and what he didn't understand but could observe and make guesses about. His dad didn't just aim to teach him what to think, but also lessons in how to think. Rather than prescribing these lessons, they came from Feynman's own experiences and questions, and his dad was part of the process cooperatively. I'm guessing his dad also learnt things about science when he had to explain them and when he chose to take Feynman's questions seriously. 


To tie this back to the quote at the beginning of this post . . . I think it's difficult to understate the value in investing in the kind of learning that helps a person make progress and create more knowledge themselves. Building institutions and traditions and a culture that makes that happen better and better is not easy to do, but it's worth doing. <br> 
It's also worth knowing that that continuous process of improvement can be intrinsically enjoyable, although I don't know what that would look like. I know it's possible and worth striving towards. 

We have the unique capability to learn from our ancestors and also to defy their ideas. And we have the unique capability to teach our descendents *and* to enable them to defy our ideas. Defiance simply to be rebellious doesn't solve much on its own. As we learn to nurture independent, critical thinking and consider it good for us&mdash;whether we're the ones questioning authority or are the ones being questioned&mdash;, we make progress. 

We've already invested quite a bit in systems that reward dutiful compliance and punish cheeky questions. Perhaps it's worth investing in systems that enable our systems to be questioned and improved by the very participants who experience those systems most closely in their process of learning. 

























